 
1 
 
  

 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
NSDL Primer on Personal Finance 
Your step-by-step guide to wealth creation 
 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
3 
 
Second Edition: October 2024  
Copyright © National Securities Depository Limited, Mumbai.  
All Rights Reserved  
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or means electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior 
permission of National Securities Depository Limited, Mumbai. 
Printed and published by National Securities Depository 
Limited.  
Published from National Securities Depository Limited, 301, 3rd 
Floor, Naman Chambers, Plot C-32, G-Block, Bandra Kurla 
Complex, Bandra East, Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400 051.  
The information provided herein is solely for creating awareness 
and educating people about rules of investment and for their 
general understanding. Readers are advised not to act purely on 
the basis of information provided herein but also to seek 
professional advice from experts before taking any investment 
decisions. NSDL does not accept responsibility for any 
investment decision taken by readers on the basis of information 
provided herein. The objective is to keep readers better 
informed and help them decide for themselves.  
The publication is an initiative of National Securities Depository 
Limited Investor Protection Fund Trust. Electronic version of 
this publication is available on our website: www.nsdl.com  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
4 
 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
5 
 
CONTENTS 
Foreword  
Personal Finance – What and Why 7 
The Need for Savings 16 
Wealth Creation  26 
Asset Allocation 71 
Insurance Fundas 89 
Prepare for Retirement 105 
Handing Over Your Legacy 122 
How to Start Investing 143 
How to Build and Monitor a Portfolio 154 
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                             
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
6 
 
FOREWORD 
In today’s fast-paced world, we often hear that "happiness 
matters more than money." While this is undeniable, financial 
security is vital in maintaining that happiness, especially when 
life throws unexpected challenges. This is why understanding 
personal finance is more important than ever—it gives you the 
freedom to face any financial storm confidently. 
But what exactly is personal finance, and why should it be a 
priority for young professionals and investors today? As the 
global economy evolves, so does the need for smarter financial 
planning. When we were kids, we learned to save money in piggy 
banks. The same principle applies to adulthood, but the stakes 
are higher. 
Starting early with a solid financial strategy can give you a 
competitive edge. Whether it’s setting aside a portion of your 
salary or strategically growing your investments, the habits you 
form now will shape your financial future. This book is designed 
to be your go-to guide, offering practical, step-by-step advice on 
building wealth and securing your future. 
So, whether you're just starting as a novice investor or looking to 
enhance your financial goals—welcome to the journey of smart 
investing! 
Mr. S. Gopalan  
Interim Managing Director,  
National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL)   
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
7 
 
CHAPTER 1 
Personal Finance – What and Why 
Just earning money is not enough. You need to smartly manage your money 
by saving today and investing for tomorrow. By practicing personal finance 
smartly, you will be able to handle budgeting, banking, insurance, loans, 
investments, retirement planning, and much more. 
Personal Finance - The Nuts and Bolts 
All of us would love to be in control of our finances. In this 
chapter, you will learn what personal finance is and the 
importance of knowing it to help you become more 
efficient in managing money.    
 
Left on its own, money can be a bad master. You may find 
yourself working too hard for too little money. So, it is 
necessary to understand the concept of personal finance to 
manage your money smartly, even if you earn less. 
Personal finance helps you to have a tight grip on your 
money and utilise it wisely.  
 
You need not be super-rich to have a good financial life. 
Your monthly salary has little to do with deciding whether 
you are an expert in personal finance or not.  You may earn 
Rs. 50,000 or Rs. 5 lakhs a month, but more income is no 
guarantee that you manage your finances well. Many 
individuals earning higher incomes suffer from money 
management problems to similar lower income earners.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
8 
 
Acknowledging Unawareness Can Result in Better Learning  
If you think, you are not proficient in money management, 
you are on the right track for a good reason. The first step 
in attaining expertise in personal finance is to accept that 
you are not doing it well enough. 
 
Just like life, solutions in personal finance only prove 
effective if you admit there is a problem. Doing so will enable 
you to develop an open -minded approach to learning the 
nitty-gritty of personal finance and absorb the concept with 
more clarity. 
 
But what if you are already well -versed in managing your 
finances? We recommend you continue reading this book 
because you may find useful insights that may sharpen your 
personal finance skills.  
What Is Personal Finance? 
You may not realise this, but your life is deeply connected 
with numbers. In school, you had to score well in 
academics to secure admission at a highly reputed college. 
Similarly, while participating in any sport, your victory 
depends on fairing numerically better than your opponent. 
If you wish to emerge as the best performer at your 
workplace, you need to deliver a higher quantitative output 
compared to your colleagues. It is all about attaining 
measurable goals. 
 
Personal finance is about meeting various financial goals that 
need to be clear and simple. A financial goal may be saving 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
9 
 
money for an overseas vacation with your family in 6 months 
or making a 30% down payment for your dream  house in 12 
months when you take a home loan. Additionally, a 
financial goal can be future-oriented, such as building a 
corpus worth Rs. 25 lakhs for your kid’s higher education 
or earning lifelong income through pension investment 
plans even if you are a private sector employee.  
 
In football, one goal rarely ensures a win. Likewise, in life, 
different financial goals are running simultaneously. It is 
never about doing one thing at a time. So, you will need to 
save for your family holiday in a few months, arrange 
funds to pay for your home loan’s down payment, and do 
intelligent investment planning to meet your kid’s future 
financial needs. Like a big railway junction, financial goals, 
like trains, crisscross all the time. So, you need to ensure 
every goal has a smooth sailing in the stipulated period.  
 
Financial goals are all about money.  So, achieving them 
depends on your income, expenses, savings, and 
investments. If you develop a solid plan balancing these 
aspects, success will knock on your doorstep. However, as 
you may know, it is challenging to make and follow an 
impressive financial plan. If you are earning well,  your 
expenses tend to get out of control, as you spend more. 
When your expenses are on a tight leash, you are saving 
too little to invest. 
 
It is quite rare that anyone earning a high income 
consistently spends very little. There will always be 
financial constraints. For instance, the month when you 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
10 
 
get a salary hike will coincidentally witness a high expense, 
as you will end up spending more. Additionally, you may 
end up making impulse-driven financial decisions fueled 
by your desires. 
 
You need to be a smart decision -maker to make the most 
of your income and savings. Knowing how to differentiate 
between good and bad advice and being disciplined about 
your financial decisions can do wonders for your and your 
family’s monetary future.   
 
Developing expertise in personal  finance comprises 
gathering knowledge of eight core areas, which include 
budgeting, banking, insurance, loans, investments, 
retirement planning, estate planning & will  etc. Through 
the chapters in this book, we have focused on these 
subjects.  
Why Should You Learn Personal Finance? 
We live in a world where instant gratification is the norm. 
People want to experience things quickly. They do not 
want any delays, be it in a train journey, food delivery, or 
when it comes to investments. Learning takes time. But 
what if you do not learn? The answer is easy —you will end 
up making costly mistakes that can harm your financial 
health.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
11 
 
Here are four reasons why it is crucial to learn about personal 
finance. 
 
1. To Be Financially Literate  
 
India is home to over 1.4 billion people. However, the 
high number of financial scams and victims falling prey to 
them indicate that the population’s financial knowledge 
level is poor.  
 
People may understand general concepts like returns and 
profit. But are they aware that returns come with a risk 
factor? Unfortunately, academic literacy and financial 
literacy differ like chalk and cheese. Financial literacy is 
about making informed and effective decisions with all 
financial resources. 
 
You need to understand the fundamentals of money 
management to successfully use financial services like 
banking, insurance, mutual funds, or stocks. So, knowing 
personal finance is critical to making the right financial 
choices. 
 
2. To Live Within Your Means 
 
Your dreams may be sky-high like owning a big car, buying 
a palatial house, going for annual overseas vacations, and 
wearing expensive clothes. It is great to have such 
aspirations, but problems may arise if you expect all your 
dreams to become reality instantly. In a world driven by 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
12 
 
money, living within your means is important.  
 
You need to analyse the pros and cons of every financial 
decision. For an average middle -class family, affordability is a 
big factor. If you do not live within your limits and let your 
emotions rule, you will find yourself seeking financial favors. 
Loans are your future inco me that you have borrowed today. 
Loans may help you bridge financial gaps, but you need to 
repay them, resulting in a future liability.  
 
Once you gain knowledge about personal finance, you will 
naturally try to live a life as per your income and expenses. 
Additionally, you will become disciplined in money 
management since you will understand  financial matters 
much better. 
 
3. To Save and Invest  
 
Savings and investments are an integral part of personal 
finance. Merely earning money cannot solve problems.  As 
Indians, our mindset has been to save our earnings.  
Unfortunately, most individuals tend to store their savings 
in idle assets like gold and non -financial assets like real 
estate. 
 
Even today, people find it safer to ‘invest’ in savings 
accounts of banks. However, it is not the best investment 
because the returns generated from a savings bank account 
are very low. If you consider inflation, the returns can 
drop to zero. Money kept locked in gold and real estate 
was useful in generating returns decades ago, but today 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
13 
 
you need to look beyond these traditional investment 
avenues to generate wealth. It is advisable to invest only a 
certain percentage in these avenues to diversify your 
investment portfolio. For instance, if you wish to invest in 
gold, experts suggest that this investment should comprise 
only 15% of your entire portfolio.   
 
 
 
Many people do not understand the difference between 
saving and investing. So, they are forced to live with poor 
returns despite the availability of good alternatives at their 
fingertips. 
 
Having an in-depth knowledge of personal finance arms 
you with the skills to save and invest properly, as per your 
DID YOU KNOW? 
Every one of two Indians keeps aside 10-
30% of their regular income as savings 
instead of investing it. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
14 
 
financial goals. It gives ideas about how much you should 
save, which investment options to consider, and the 
projected returns after adjusting for taxes and inflation . 
 
4. To Understand Taxes 
Do you know that your bank deposit’s interest  income is 
taxed? Do you know the tax you will pay on your fixed 
deposits (FDs) as per your income tax slab? So, if you fall 
in the highest tax slab of 30%, your FD interest income 
will be added to your income and taxed at the same rate. 
Additionally, if you plan to sell any owned property, you 
will be liable to pay taxes. Many people do not know the 
effect of taxes on their investments. So, when they have to 
pay the tax later, they realise their mistakes. However, it is 
too late by then. 
You may know the importance of earning a profit on 
investment. However, your profit will be taxed as per  
applicable rules. The good news is that you may save tax 
by making various investments. For instance, Section 80C 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 gives every individual the 
opportunity to lower their taxable income up to Rs. 1.5 
lakhs. By using this investment opportunity, you can 
reduce your taxes.  
 
Developing expertise in personal finance will empower 
you to understand taxes and benefit from various taxation 
rules. Saving your money from unnecessary taxes will help 
you grow your wealth faster.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Learning about personal finance, which is managing 
your money independently, is essential to help you 
budget, spend, save, and invest over time 
 
• Dreaming big is great, but you need to take small steps 
consistently to transform your desires into reality 
 
• Saving and investing are as crucial as earning income 
 
• Having in-depth knowledge about risks and rewards 
can help you make informed financial decisions 
 
• Being focused and disciplined can play an integral role 
in achieving your financial objectives  
 
• Caution is key 
 
• Considering the impact of inflation and taxes on your 
financial plans is necessary 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
16 
 
CHAPTER 2 
The Need for Savings  
If you save Rs. 50 per day from the age of 20, by the time you are 75, you 
will save Rs. 10 lakhs. If you saved Rs. 100 every day, this amount 
becomes Rs. 20 lakhs.  
None of us can predict the future. Saving money can help you become 
financially secure. You can use the safety net in case of an emergency. 
Begin your journey into the world of savings today. 
 
Why Is It So Important to Save Money? 
 
Most of us tend to save after spending. However, it should 
be the other way around. One should make it a point to 
save first and spend later after what has been saved. Many 
find it difficult to save money from the monthly income. 
In this chapter, you will learn about the concept of saving, a 
few useful ideas to help you achieve your objective of 
saving smartly, and the different avenues where you can 
safeguard your hard-earned money.  
  
You feel on top of the world when your salary gets 
credited to your bank account or when you earn sufficient 
profits from your business. However, once you receive the 
money, unfortunately, the race to finish it begins.  By the 
end of the month, a meagre amount is left. This sums up 
how the average month of a middle -class working 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
17 
 
professional starts and ends. Until a few years ago, Indians 
were known to be proficient in saving. But the massive 
wave of consumption has meant that saving money is now 
only an afterthought.  
 
You put in immense effort daily at your workplace, for 
which you receive a monthly salary that enables you to 
fund your immediate requirements and other materialistic 
desires, such as buying designer clothes or the latest 
electronic gadgets. But what would  be your plan of action 
to manage certain inevitable expenses in the future? Would 
you intend to wait to organise the funds when situations 
arise, or do you wish to be financially prepared 
beforehand? It is quite understandable that, in all 
likelihood, you would choose the latter approach like any 
sensible financial planner. In the future, you may require 
funds to fulfill various financial commitments like your 
kid’s education and wedding.  
 
So, it is necessary to inculcate the habit of savings 
right now, as the money earned today gets locked 
aside for tomorrow.   
 
What Is Saving? 
 
Saving is the money that you earn but not spend. Let us 
make you understand this with an illustration. Suppose 
your monthly salary is Rs. 56,000 and your monthly 
expenses amount to Rs. 39,000 per month, then in this 
scenario, your monthly savings would be Rs. 17,000 (Rs. 
56,000 - Rs. 39,000).  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
18 
 
 
An effective way of saving is by reducing idle expenses. 
Considering the above illustration, if you earn Rs.  56,000 
monthly but end up spending Rs. 52,000 every month, you 
are saving only Rs. 4,000 per month. However, if you 
reduce your expenditure by Rs. 6,000, your monthly 
spending will drop to Rs. 46,000 from Rs. 52,000, ensuring 
you save Rs. 10,000 per month.  
 
You may also consider increasing your savings by 
supplementing your primary earnings with additional 
income streams, such as taking up freelance assignments in 
your area of expertise or doing some side hustle like stand -
up comedy gigs if you have a funny b one or anything 
related to performing arts like singing, dancing, and acting 
at live events if you have the flair for that. However, this is 
easier said than done. In today’s stressful and demanding 
professional environment, doing one full -time job can take 
a toll on anyone’s health due to long working hours and a 
lack of work-life balance. So, following this approach 
requires nerves of steel and high energy levels at all times. 
However, eventually, you may burn out. So, it would be 
wiser to control your expenses and spend as per your 
requirements instead of overworking and not giving time 
to your loved ones.   
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
19 
 
How can you become a smart money -saver? 
 
1. Establish your budget  
Plan a budget for every month preferably on the last day of 
the previous month. For instance, plan your budget for 
August preferably on the last day of July. Jot down the 
estimated expenses to be incurred on restaurants, 
groceries, utilities, entertainment, and personal care. Do 
not wait for the month-end to review. Instead, monitor 
how the plan is working every week. This would help you 
to keep track of expenses and avoid spending more, 
resulting in savings. 
 
 
 
DID YOU KNOW? 
India’s household savings have been on 
the decline. The savings rate of the 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was 
11.5% in FY 2020-21 and it dropped to 
6% in FY 2023-24. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
20 
 
2. Budget with cash and envelopes  
 
If you have a habit of spending when not needed, try the 
age-old envelope budget system. Divide the money into 
envelopes. Doing so will automatically set a limit for almost 
all types of spending.  
 
By following this system, you are less likely to overspend. 
You will have more self-control and ultimately save 
money. 
 
3. Set up automatic savings  
 
It is the easiest and most effective way to save money. Ask 
your employer to deduct your income and put the 
deducted sum into a Voluntary Provident Fund (VPF), in 
case it is available.  
Alternatively, you may consider investing in Systematic 
Investment Plans (SIPs) of mutual funds or purchase 
equity shares by opting for the ‘auto debit’ facility which is 
available to demat account holders, ensuring that the 
money is debited from your bank account automatically on 
a selected date and invested in your preferred SIP so that 
you do not end up spending unnecessarily.  
With no human intervention, you will end up saving 
automatically for a better financial future without even 
realising it.   
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
21 
 
 
 
4. Calculate purchases by hours  
Want to buy a fancy pair of designer shoes?  Take the price 
of the product you’re considering to purchase and divide it 
by your hourly wage.  
So, if you earn Rs. 350 per hour and work for 10 hours per 
day, your daily income will be Rs. 3,500. Similarly, your 
weekly income will be Rs. 17,500, considering you work 5 
days/50 hours per week (Rs. 350 multiplied by 50 hours).  
By doing this calculation, you will make a rational decision 
whether the new pair of shoes costing Rs. 15,000 is worth 
the weekly income you earn for working 50 hours or not.  
DID YOU KNOW? 
A monthly SIP of Rs.  1,000 for 20 years 
can help you earn nearly Rs. 8 lakhs as 
return on investment at 10% expected 
return on investment.  
 
 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
22 
 
5. Unsubscribe from marketing  emails 
Receiving marketing emails from stores and outlets where 
you spend the most money can tempt you to bring out the 
shopaholic within you. They lure you to spend more.  
An easy way to avoid this is by clicking on the unsubscribe 
link, usually found at the bottom of the email. The 
moment you unsubscribe from such emails,  life becomes 
much easier. If you don’t get to know about deals, chances 
are high that you will spend less and save more.  
6. Keep one day per week as a ‘no spend day’  
You spend every day you do not earn every day, as salary 
comes once a month. To have a level playing field, reserve 
one day a week when you will not spend any money.  
Stay indoors and play board games or watch a movie with 
your dear ones. This is how you can  save the money you 
would have spent if you were out with friends or family. 
 
Go-to Avenues for Saving Money 
Once you have taken steps to curtail costs, you need to 
park your savings carefully.  
 
Do note that saving is a very different concept from 
investing. In savings, you are more concerned about 100% 
principal protection instead of returns on investment. 
Following are popular avenues to help you fulfill this 
objective. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
23 
 
 
1. Bank Savings Account 
 
This type of bank account helps you save money regularly 
or in a lump sum. The money saved in banks is secure. 
When saving, you may make cash deposits or transfer 
funds online to your account. 
 
2. Post Office Savings Account 
 
Apart from banks, many people save money  in post office 
accounts. At least one deposit or withdrawal in three 
financial years is mandatory to keep a post office savings 
account active. 
 
3. Provident Fund 
 
An example of mandatory saving, PF was designed for any 
employee to save for retirement and build a significant 
corpus over a period. However,  many people use PF as a 
saving mode by asking their employers to deduct extra 
money from their salary and transfer it to PF. However, 
remember that you cannot easily liquidate the money in your PF 
unlike a bank account and post office savings account. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
24 
 
4. Small-Saving Schemes 
 
The Government of India has launched different small -
saving schemes, such as the National Savings Certificate 
(NSC) and Kisan Vikas Patra (KVP) to facilitate nominal 
income earners. Like PF, these schemes are not very liquid 
because they have a period when one cannot withdraw or 
transfer money. Although small-saving schemes are popular, the 
restriction to withdraw for a particular period can be a minus 
point if you need funds urgently.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
25 
 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Save first and then spend 
 
• Create a budget and follow it diligently for the rest of 
the month 
 
• Save for a rainy day when you anticipate not having 
any income 
 
• Control spending to help boost savings 
 
• Use the automatic saving route and switch to the age-
old cash envelope system to limit spending 
 
Use a combination of bank and post office savings 
accounts to save money regularly
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER 3 
Wealth Creation 
Many earn and save money. But only a handful can  create wealth. There 
is no magic formula or shortcut for wealth creation. You need to stay 
disciplined, focused, and invested for the long term.  
In this chapter, you will find ways to implement different investment 
ideas and let your money work as hard as you do. Here, you will 
discover how wealth creation is about giving yourself many investment 
options and choosing the right ones to help you deliver desired outcomes.  
 
What Is Investing? 
For most people, the only genuine way to attain financial 
security is to save and invest over a long period. If you wish 
to achieve economic stability and get over the impact of 
inflation, you need to invest your savings wisely in profitable 
investment avenues. This is the essence of investing.  
 
Let us explain the need for investment with a simple 
illustration. Imagine your monthly take -home pay is Rs. 
45,000 and your household expenses are Rs. 40,000. So, in 
this case, your monthly savings are Rs. 5,000. However, 
will this nominal amount deposited in your bank prove 
sufficient during an unforeseen scenario when you may 
have no income? If you need Rs. 40,000 per month to 
manage your household expenses during a situation when 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
27 
 
you have no stable earnings, you will need to have savings 
for at least eight months or more, which means Rs. 5,000 x 
8 needs to be accumulated in your bank account. It is 
much easier said than done because it would be difficult  to 
save for eight months without earning a single penny 
during this duration.  
 
This is when the concept of investing comes to your 
rescue. You need to save Rs. 5,000 per month starting 
today to generate a saving of Rs. 40,000 for the future by 
investing your savings wisely.   
 
You need not be an MBA or an investment genius to 
achieve this objective. You need to create an intelligent 
investment plan and stick to it. 
 
Investing: An Act of Commitment 
You invest with an expectation to earn additional income.  
Legendary investor Warren Buffett has an interesting way 
of defining investing. He calls it the process of laying  out 
money now to receive more money in the future. Investing 
has only one goal of growing your money over time by 
investing today in the right investment avenues and 
diversifying your investment portfolio. 
   
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
28 
 
 
 
When you earn a salary, you have no pressure to spend it 
on materialistic requirements, such as clothes, 
entertainment, and the latest gadgets. You feel that doing 
so gives you instant gratification, making your life 
wonderful and enjoyable.  
 
However, investing is a different ball game altogether 
because it requires prioritising your financial future over 
your present desires and lifestyle. All you need to do is 
invest a small amount across worthwhile long-term avenues 
consistently to reap the benefits in the future. 
 
DID YOU KNOW? 
According to PGIM Mutual Fund’s recent 
Retirement Readiness Survey, 51% of Indians are 
unprepared for their retirement, with many not 
having started financial planning for retirement.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
29 
 
How does investing differ from saving? 
 
Saving and investing may seem the same to the common 
man. Generally, people tend to use these terms 
interchangeably. But these two concepts are different.  
 
Here is an illustration to give you a better understanding. 
Haresh is a software engineer earning Rs. 65,000 monthly. 
Now taking care of all his expenses, he has savings of Rs. 
18,000 remaining in his bank account. Now, if he retains 
this amount in his bank account, it is his saving. However, 
if he puts this money into investment avenues like stocks 
and bonds, his savings of Rs. 18,000 becomes an 
investment.  
 
Investing originates from saving. Simply put, saving is 
keeping aside the money you do not spend now but wish 
to access quickly with no risk.   
 
Do note that not all savings are investments. Investing is 
buying assets such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, gold, or 
real estate. Generally speaking, an investment may either 
fall in the category of income-oriented or growth-oriented.  
For instance, if you deposited Rs. 2,000 in a savings bank 
account with a return of 4% annual interest, it would grow 
to Rs. 2,080 a year (before taxes). However, if you invest 
the same amount in a mutual fund earning an average of 
10% a year, your investment would grow to Rs. 2,200 
(before taxes). 
 
Making the correct choice between saving or investing 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
30 
 
depends on your goal. If just saving works for you, 
continue doing that without investing. But if saving 
alone cannot help you, supplement saving with 
investing. 
What are financial goals? 
 
The word ‘goal’ may remind you of a  visual of a goalpost 
and a football screeching past the goal line into the net. As 
you may know, 11 players work together in a football team 
in synergy to score a goal. Similarly, your financial goals 
require coordination. 
A financial goal is your monetary objective and it is 
determined by the future requirement for money. Different 
financial goals arise during various phases of life. For 
instance, building a substantial retirement corpus 25 -30 years 
from now maybe your long -term financial goal to help you 
achieve monetary freedom post -retirement. Similarly, 
arranging funds for your kid’s wedding which may happen 
after 10 years, or making the down payment for your home 
loan can qualify as another long -term financial goal. 
Conversely, saving money for a foreign trip that you plan to 
go on seven months later is your short -term financial goal.  
 
Once you acknowledge the need to achieve different financial 
goals during various stages of life, you start moving on the 
right track. Many people fail to accept the importance of 
accomplishing these goals due to which they falter in financial 
planning. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
31 
 
Different types of financial goals  
 
Regardless of your age, setting financial  goals is very 
important. The secret ingredient is to set up personal 
financial goals as per your projected monetary needs. For 
instance, if your monthly expenses would be Rs. 50,000 at the 
age of 60, you would need to have a stable income worth Rs. 
60,000 at that time to meet the expenditure and have 
some savings in your bank account.  
Recognising your aspirations and future needs is 50% of 
the job done. The next 50% comprises setting up a plan 
to attain these goals. 
When it comes to breaking down financial goals, we can 
categorise them into three main types, short-term, 
medium-term, and long-term. 
 
Short-term Goals 
These are tasks that you may accomplish within 1 year. As 
you can understand, short-term goals are something that 
you aim to achieve soon. 
 
For instance, paying off credit card dues is a short -term 
goal. Similarly, a few other examples in this category may 
include buying household furniture, doing minor home 
improvements, or saving money to pay the down payment 
for a car loan or two-wheeler loan. Additionally, arranging 
funds for going on a family holiday or buying gadgets 
comes under short-term goals. These goals are the easiest 
and quickest to attain.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
32 
 
 
Medium-term Goals 
In this category, you may achieve your financial objectives 
between 1-5 years. As you can see, medium-term goals take 
longer time than short-term goals. 
 
Before setting medium-term goals, be certain about the 
aspirations you wish to accomplish in the next few years. 
Having clarity about this will guide your saving and 
investing motives.  
 
Do remember that medium-term goals may be the hardest 
to achieve because they fall between short- and long-term 
goals. Short-term goals get complete attention since they 
always seem so close. Long-term goals also get a decent 
amount of attention because financial commitments like 
arranging sufficient funds for your kid’s higher education 
or building a sizable retirement corpus for your economic 
stability hold high relevance. So, this results in medium -
term goals getting less time and importance.   
 
A good way to constantly track and monitor medium-term 
financial goals is to write them in a diary and review their 
progress every three months, ensuring they get adequate  
attention. So, in case you find out that you are falling 
behind, you will get time to get back on track and achieve 
these goals.  
 
As it takes around 5 years to accomplish medium -term 
goals, you may stay invested and not become risk averse. 
Contrary to short-term goals, which get accomplished 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
33 
 
during a maximum timeframe of  1 year, medium-term 
goals allow you to strike a balance between risk and 
reward. 
 
Long-term Goals 
These goals generally take over 5 years to achieve. Long-
term goals hold significant importance for you and your 
family. The time frame is longer in case of these goals 
because:  
 
1. The financial requirement will arise after a long time. 
For instance, you will retire once your age is 60. You 
cannot prepone your retirement to the age of 35.  
2. The amount required is high. So, you need to save and 
invest for long. For instance, if you expect to send your kid 
abroad for higher education at Rs. 30 lakhs and can invest 
only Rs. 4,000 per month, you will need 20 years to 
accomplish this target if the investment gives you a 10% 
return annually. Even if you double the investment to Rs. 
8,000 per month, you will reach only Rs. 16.5 lakhs in 10 
years. 
This indicates that efficient planning to achieve your long -
term financial goals will result in systematic execution. 
Remember, these are crucial life goals, and you cannot 
compromise on them.  
 
Contrary to short- and medium-term goals, long-term 
goals give you the luxury of time. However, there is also a 
risk involved in achieving them because too  much time can 
compel you to keep delaying the inevitable when taking 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
34 
 
action to accomplish these goals. So, you need to be on 
the right track at all times. 
 
Investment planning for building a substantial retirement 
corpus or arranging finance for your kid’s higher  education 
cannot wait for another 5 years when the time arises. You 
may not want to see yourself working for an extra duration 
of 5 years until you turn 65 just because you did not save 
and invest smartly. So, start planning for your long -term 
financial goals without delay to bridge the gap between 
your kid’s academic aspirations and the cost involved in 
fulfilling them. If you do not have the funds to meet these 
inevitable expenses, your kid may be forced to take an 
education loan to fulfill their dreams which might put an 
unnecessary burden on them because of a delay in 
investment planning from your end. So, take proactive 
measures now to accomplish your long -term financial 
objectives. 
 
What is risk tolerance? 
 
Any investment has two friends, Mr. Risk and Mr. Return. 
If you become more friendly with Mr. Risk, your 
investment can get more of Mr. Return. However, more 
risk can also mean incurring losses if the time frame is too 
short. So, you as an investor, need to identify the level of 
your risk-taking ability. The extent to which you can take 
risks is your risk tolerance. It is the degree  of 
variability/swings in investment returns you are willing to 
withstand. Simply put, if you were expecting a 10% return 
on investment but only earned 5%, how comfortable 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
35 
 
would you be with a 5% lower return? If you were 
comfortable, your risk tolerance level would be relatively 
high and vice-versa.    
 
Let’s look at another instance. You invested with an 
expectation to earn a 20% annual return but instead 
incurred a 4% loss. Will you be comfortable if such a 
situation arises? If yes, your risk tolerance level is 
extremely high and vice-versa.  
 
 
 
The different levels of an investor’s risk tolerance are: 
 
Conservative 
 
Investors in this category focus on preserving capital, even if it means 
missing out on potential returns. 
 
Moderately Conservative 
 
Investors in this category wish to preserve capital but are willing to 
accept a small degree of risk for gains. 
 
Moderate 
 
Investors in this category aspire to reduce risks and enhance returns 
equally. 

 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
36 
 
 
Moderately Aggressive 
 
Investors in this category aim to earn long-term returns but are 
willing to accept significant risk. 
 
Aggressive 
 
Investors in this category have the highest risk appetite. They want to 
maximise returns and are willing to endure excessive volatility and 
significant losses.   
 
It is critical to have a realistic understanding of your ability 
and willingness to bear risk. The ability to tolerate large 
swings in the value of your investments will tell you about 
your actual comfort level.  
Be genuine about your fears and worries. You may wish to 
give an impression to people that your risk tolerance is 
high, but a small swing in returns on investment may 
shock you. If this trend continues, accept that your 
perception of yourself is wrong.  
 
As a thumb rule, you earn higher returns when you take 
higher risks. If you take lower risks, you might not earn 
substantial returns. As beautifully stated by the legendary 
Indian business tycoon, not taking any risk in today’s 
evolving world is a recipe for failure.  
 
If you take very high risks while investing, you might panic 
and sell your investments at the wrong time. This may 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
37 
 
defeat the entire purpose of your investments.  
 
If you take low risks, you may never achieve your financial 
objectives in time, negating the purpose of investing. So, 
you need to develop a balance between risk and return to 
invest smartly by spreading your investments across 
different high-risk, medium-risk, and low-risk avenues.  
 
How Can You Start Your Investment Journey and 
Reap Benefits? 
 
When figuring out how to invest money, it is always better 
to start with the basics, such as the specific goal behind 
investing and the investment avenues/instruments you 
may consider. The goal can be short -, medium-, or long-
term, which we have explained earlier. We will later explain 
the different investment avenue s that you may tap. 
 
The entire experience of how to invest can vary depending 
on your experience as an investor. Here are a few tips for 
different target groups, new and experienced investors. 
You may follow these ideas depending on your current 
level of experience as an investor.  
 
Guidelines for novice investors 
 
When you invest money for the first time, you have no 
track record, which is a pro and a con.  The positive 
takeaway is that you are a fresh investor and do not have 
any expectations or burdens. However, your lack of  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
38 
 
experience makes you vulnerable to mistakes.  
 
Remember the golden rule that you are investing with the belief 
that the value of that particular investment will grow over 
time. Investing is not a get-rich-quick route. You need to 
be patient and stay invested for a long duration to ensure 
your investment grows consistently.  
 
With the requisite time and discipline, you may build a 
substantial investment corpus by investing a nominal 
amount regularly in the right instruments/avenues.   
 
Guidelines for seasoned investors  
 
If you have some experience, you already know how this 
game works. You may have sound knowledge, but every 
investing journey is unique. So, it is necessary to stay 
grounded and not expect miracles. 
 
The fate of an investment does not change because you 
have decided to give it a try. Just like you, thousands of 
investors are buying and selling the  same investment 
instruments such as shares, etc. Having a calm mind and 
belief helps the process immensely. A new beginner may 
have setbacks initially. However, as an experienced market 
player, you may be aware that being patient and persistent 
pays in the long run. 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
39 
 
Investment Avenues You May Consider  
1. Fixed Deposits (FDs)  
An FD is a safe investment instrument. FDs help you grow  
your savings and ensure the security of the principal invested. 
By investing in an FD, you get reasonable  flexibility, assured 
returns, and high stability. 
 
You may either invest in bank FDs or eligible non -banking 
financial companies (NBFCs), which are regulated by RBI 
to collect deposits. Bank FDs offer more security 
compared to their NBFC counterparts. FDs  require a one-
time investment. So, if you wish to start new FDs, you need 
to invest more separately. This way, you may have multiple 
FDs with different maturity values and durations.   
 
FDs can generate interest income for varying periods, 
ranging from 1 week to 10 years. You may choose between 
two types of FDs according to your financial objectives 
and requirements. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
40 
 
Cumulative FDs Non-cumulative FDs 
Functionality: Interest gets 
compounded annually and 
is reinvested with the 
principal. Interest earned 
in every financial year gets 
added to the initial 
investment. The money 
invested gets locked until 
maturity, with no facility 
to withdraw your 
investment.  
 
Functionality: Provides 
regular interest on a 
monthly, quarterly, half-
yearly, or yearly basis, 
depending on your selected 
frequency. Offers 
consistent income at 
periodic intervals.  
Pros: Offers higher 
returns on maturity. Ideal 
for meeting long-term 
financial goals.  
Pros: Ensures a steady 
income flow. Provides 
flexible payout alternatives 
based on your monetary 
requirements.  
 
 
The interest earned by investing in an FD gets taxed according to 
your income slab.  Some FDs offer a premature withdrawal 
facility, while others do not. The interest rate of the FDs in 
the latter category is usually higher. FD  is a popular 
investment avenue because it safeguards the principal and 
interest. 
 
Additionally, there is another type of FD known as tax -
saving FD. As the name suggests, these FDs offer a tax 
deduction under Section 80C of the  Income Tax Act, 
1961. You may claim a maximum deduction of Rs. 1.5 lakhs 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
41 
 
by investing in them. These FDs have a minimum lock-in 
period of five years and do not permit a partial or premature 
withdrawal. 
 
2. Recurring Deposits (RDs)  
 
If you are looking for an avenue that ensures disciplined 
investing regularly, you may consider RD ’s. You may 
invest a fixed sum in an RD by giving your bank a standing 
instruction to deduct a particular amount every month 
from your salary bank account and transfer the money to 
your RD.  This avenue gives you the facility to invest 
regularly. You may withdraw your investment from an RD 
prematurely after paying a penalty. RD is a useful 
investment instrument for goal planning, as it enables 
consistent investing. 
 
3. Public Provident Fund (PPF)  
 
The National Savings Organisation launched the PPF 
scheme in 1968 to promote small savings. It is an extremely 
popular long-term investment avenue. It offers decent 
returns on investment and income tax benefits under 
Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961.  
 
You may open only one PPF account if you are an Indian 
citizen; you cannot have multiple accounts. Additionally, 
you may open a PPF account on behalf of a minor aged 
below 18 after providing their legal age proof.  
 
You may open a PPF account in designated bank branches 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
42 
 
and post offices by submitting an account opening form 
with your photograph, ID proof, and address proof. If you  
are an existing bank customer, you may approach your 
bank, as it may offer you the facility of opening a PPF 
account online. This procedure may take a few minutes. 
 
Conversely, if you prefer the traditional mode, you may 
visit a bank’s branch or post office to open a PPF account.  
 
Steps to Open a PPF Account Offline  
 
• Get an application form from the nearest post office or 
bank branch 
• Fill the application form and submit it with the required 
KYC documents like your ID proof, address proof, and 
passport-size photograph 
• Make an initial deposit to activate the account 
 
Deposit-related Details in a PPF 
 
Minimum Amount 
Required to Start a PPF 
Maximum Deposit 
Allowed in a Financial 
Year] 
Rs. 500 Rs. 1.5 lakhs 
 
Once you have submitted all the documents with the initial 
deposit, you will get a passbook for the PPF account, 
which will contain information like your  name, account 
number, and name of the branch where you have opened 
the account.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
43 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
44 
 
Benefits of Opening a PPF Account   
 
• Risk-free interest rate in a scheme backed by the 
Government of India  
• Interest gets compounded annually, ensuring higher 
returns on maturity for a long-term investment  
• Tax rebate up to Rs. 1.5 lakhs under Section 80C of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961  
• Loan facility against the balance amount in the PPF  
• Low investment required; you may invest Rs. 500 per 
year to ensure the account stays active  
• Long-term interest guarantee until the maturity period 
of 15 years with the possibility to extend the PPF in 5 -year 
intervals indefinitely; you need not make any deposits 
during the extended tenure and have the flexibility to 
partially withdraw funds      
• Partial withdrawal facility available from the 7 th financial 
year 
• Flexibility of transferring the account to any branch of 
the bank/post office without incurring any cost as per 
your request  
• Tax-free investment avenue; PPF falls under the 
Exempt-Exempt-Exempt (EEE) category. So, any 
investment made into the account is tax -exempt under 
Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Moreover, the 
amount you receive on maturity and interest earned are 
tax-exempt. So, you need not pay any tax.  
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
45 
 
Things to Remember While Operating a PPF Account 
 
• You may prematurely close the account only after it 
completes 5 years of operations under certain permissible 
circumstances like the requirement of funds for your or 
your family member’s medical treatment from a life -
threatening ailment, or to meet the exp enses towards your 
or your kid’s higher education. Additionally, if you become 
a Non-Resident Indian (NRI), you may avail of the 
premature withdrawal facility. However, do note this facility 
comes at an interest rate penalty of 1%. So, if you earned an 
interest of 7.10% per year for 5 years, the interest for every year gets 
reduced to 6.10%. 
• You need to deposit a minimum of Rs. 500 each financial 
year in the PPF to keep it active; if you fail to do so, the 
account will stand inactive   
• You may consider maximising the interest on your PPF 
account by investing the maximum permissible amount at 
one go during the start of the financial year. PPF accounts 
follow an April-to-March year. So, you may deposit the 
entire amount before 5th April every year, to earn the 
maximum interest. 
 
4. Post Office Monthly Income Scheme (Post Office MIS) 
Another traditionally popular investment avenue is Post 
Office Monthly Income Scheme Account (MIS). You may 
start a Post Office MIS with a minimum investment of Rs. 
1,500. The maximum investment limit permitted in a Post 
Office MIS is Rs. 9 lakhs in a single account and Rs. 15 
lakhs in a joint account. When it comes to calculating an 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
46 
 
individual’s share in a joint account, each holder has an 
equal share. So, if there are 2 joint holders, both have a 
shareholding of 50% each.  
 
Things to Remember While Investing in a Post Office 
MIS  
 
1. You may open and transfer a Post Office MIS account. 
There is no specified limit on opening multiple accounts. 
However, you may need to adhere to the  maximum 
investment limit by adding the balance to all such 
accounts. The maturity period of a Post Office MIS account 
is 5 years. 
 
2. You may open a Post Office MIS account in a minor’s 
name who is aged 10 and above.   
 
3. You may withdraw the interest earned from this account 
via the auto-credit facility, permitting the transfer of funds 
into the savings account active at the same post office.  
4. You cannot make any withdrawals before the expiry of 1 year 
from the date of investment. However, you may do premature 
withdrawals if needed after this period. Here are the norms 
regarding premature withdrawal from the Post Office MIS 
account: 
 
If you withdraw between 1-3 years of opening the account, you 
will be charged a 2% deduction on deposit 
 
If you withdraw between 3-5 years of starting the account, you 
will be charged a 1% deduction on deposit 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
47 
 
 
So, if you deposited Rs. 1 lakh in the Post Office MIS, you will 
be charged a deduction of 2% of Rs. 1 lakh if you withdraw 
between 1-3 years and a deduction of 1% of Rs. 1 lakh if you 
withdraw between 3-5 years. 
 
5. Government Securities (G-Secs) 
 
G-Secs are short-term and long-term bonds issued by the 
Government of India to raise funds for their expenditures.  
 
The government pays a specified coupon or interest rate 
on these bonds either annually, semi-annually, or for any 
other specified frequency. G-Secs, which have a tenure of 
less than a year, are known as treasury bills. G -Secs, which 
mature after a year, are called bonds.  
 
Advantages of G-Secs 
 
• They are backed by the Government of India, ensuring 
a sovereign guarantee. So, they carry no risk.  
 
• They allow you to lock in attractive interest rates for 
tenures ranging from 91 days to 40 years. Such long -term 
interest rate assurance is exceptional because even bank 
FDs offer a maximum tenure of 10 years.  
 
• They do not have any Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) 
involved for the interest earned 
 
• They may be held in demat form, ensuring convenience      
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
48 
 
In 2017, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) notified that 
stock exchanges could act as aggregators for non -
competitive bidding for retail investors to access G-Secs. 
Retail investors may buy G-Secs with a minimum 
investment of Rs. 10,000. 
 
Private sector company platforms, banks, and the National 
Stock Exchange (NSE) goBID app allow you to invest in G -
Secs online. The registration process is simple. You may 
do it digitally if you have a demat account. 
 
On the NSE goBID platform, choose your registered broker 
to facilitate this transaction. You may also need to enter 
information like your personal details and  PAN. Once you 
buy these securities, they get stored in your demat account.  
 
While buying a G-Sec, check the bond’s coupon or annual 
interest rate. Hold the bond until it matures. At maturity,  
you will get the face value you paid and any remaining 
interest payout. If needed, you may exit the investment 
before its maturity. 
 
6. Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) 
SSY is a government scheme aimed at securing a bright future 
for the girl child in India. In this scheme, the parents/legal 
guardians of a girl child invest to build a substantial fund 
to meet future expenses like her education and wedding.  
Any girl who is a resident of India may be a beneficiary  of 
this scheme from the time of opening the account until its 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
49 
 
maturity or closure. If you are a parent or legal guardian of 
a girl child aged below 10, you may consider investing in 
this avenue for her financial future. 
 
Things to Know About Investing in SSY  
 
• You may deposit the amount and operate the account. 
However, the girl child needs to mandatorily operate the 
account after she reaches the age of 18.   
• You may open only 1 account per girl child in any 
authorised post or bank branch. Moreover, you may open an 
SSY account for maximum two children in your family, even if 
you have adopted a girl.  
• You need to make a minimum investment of Rs. 250 and 
the maximum amount can go up to Rs. 1.5 lakhs every 
financial year; the investment tenure is up to 15 years 
• You need to take into account that SSY has a maturity period 
of 21 years from the date of account opening or upon your 
daughter’s wedding after reaching the age of 18 (whichever is 
earlier). No interest is payable after maturity. 
• You may prematurely close the account if the girl child 
becomes an NRI  
• You may withdraw funds from the SSY account for 
higher education if the girl child has reached the age of 18 
or has completed 10th grade in school to meet education-
related expenses, such as fees or other charges incurred during 
admission to an educational institution. This  withdrawal 
has a maximum limit of 50% of the balance in the SSY at 
the end of the previous financial year.  
• You may claim tax benefits when investing in an SSY. 
You are eligible for a full tax deduction on an investment 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
50 
 
up to Rs. 1.5 lakhs as per Section 80C of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961. Additionally, the interest and maturity proceeds 
are tax-free, making SSY an EEE investment avenue.  
 
7. Sovereign Gold Bonds (SGBs) 
The Government of India launched the Sovereign Gold 
Bond (SGB) Scheme in in November 2015. Investing in gold 
is much easier and more convenient with SGBs.  
As an investor, you may earn an assured interest rate of 
2.5% per annum on the amount of initial investment. You 
also eliminate the risk and cost of storing gold by investing in 
SGBs. In this investment avenue, the  redemption gets linked 
to the gold price prevailing at the time of redemption. 
Additionally, you need not pay any capital gains tax if you 
hold the SGBs until maturity.  
Features of SGBs  
 
• They have a tenure of 8 years, with an option to exit 
from the 5th year  
• You receive a ‘certificate of holding’ when you invest in 
SGBs on the date of issuance; you may collect this 
certificate from the bank’s branch or access it directly 
through an e-mail; the RBI will send it to you via e -mail if 
you have provided your e-mail ID in the application form  
• You may subscribe and hold SGBs in  demat form, as it 
is easy to store. For this purpose, mention the details of 
your DP ID and DP Client ID in the application form.  
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
51 
 
How can you invest in SGBs?  
 
The RBI opens issues for subscription in tranches in 
consultation with the government. The RBI notifies the 
terms and conditions of the scheme from time to time. 
The subscription for SGBs will be open as per a calendar. 
The RBI declares the rate of interest before every new 
tranche by issuing a press release. 
 
8. Atal Pension Yojana (APY) 
It is a pension scheme mainly aimed at the unorganised 
sector. APY provides you the facility to get a fixed pension  
of Rs. 1,000, Rs. 2000, Rs.  3,000, Rs.  4,000, or Rs. 5,000 
once you reach the age of 60.  
 
In an APY, the pension corpus gets created from the 
contributions you invested in  different assets. The Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
(PFRDA) manages the collected amount under the 
scheme. 
 
In this scheme, aspects like the contributor’s age and the 
contribution amount determine the pension. The 
contributor’s spouse may stake claim to the pension upon 
the contributor’s death. If the contributor and his/her spouse 
both passes away, their nominee will receive the 
accumulated corpus. 
 
If the contributor dies before reaching 60 years of age, the 
spouse has the facility to exit the scheme and claim the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
52 
 
corpus. If the spouse does not wish to exit, he/she may 
continue the scheme for the remaining period. 
 
In order to qualify as an APY subscriber, you need to be 
an Indian citizen aged between 18 -40 and make 
contributions for a minimum duration  of 20 years. All the 
top banks provide the scheme. You may visit any of these 
bank branches to invest in an APY or start the process 
online from the comfort of your home.  
 
As an APY is an automatic investment scheme, all your 
periodic contributions get debited automatically from your 
bank account. Any default on your payments will attract a 
penalty. Default status on your payments for 6 months will 
lead to your APY account being frozen. If the default continues 
for 12 months, the account will be closed and the remaining 
amount will be paid back to the subscriber.  
  
If you wish to exit the APY before turning 60, you may be 
legally permitted to do so. However, in such a scenario, only 
your contributions and the net real accrued income earned on 
these contributions after deducting the account maintenance fee 
will be returned to you. 
 
9. National Pension System/National Pension Scheme 
(NPS) 
 
NPS is a voluntary and long-term investment plan for retirement. 
Like APY, this scheme is also under the purview of the PFRDA. 
It is open to employees from the public and private sectors and 
is a self-funded pension system. In this scheme, you may invest as a 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
53 
 
subscriber in the pension account at regular intervals. After 
retirement, you may withdraw a certain percentage of the corpus 
and receive the remaining amount as a monthly pension. 
A certain portion of the NPS investment gets allotted to 
equities/stocks. However, there is a cap on the equity exposure, 
which acts like a stabiliser for the risk-return equation. 
 
When it comes to retirement planning, you may choose to invest 
your money in different avenues. However, according to the 
PFRDA website, the account maintenance cost under NPS is 
the lowest compared to similar pension products available in 
India, such as retirement plans offered by insurance companies 
and mutual funds. 
 
You may switch between different pension funds and 
investment options, subject to certain regulatory restrictions. 
When you invest in an NPS, you may choose between the active 
choice or auto choice investment as well as the pension fund that 
manages the investments.  
 
The NPS auto choice investment comprises 3 Life Cycle 
(LC) funds, LC75, LC50, and LC25. LC75 is an  aggressive 
life cycle fund in which the exposure in equity investments 
starts at 75% till your age is 35 and it gradually reduces 
once your age increases. LC50 is a moderate life cycle fund 
in which the exposure in equity investments starts at 50% 
until you reach the age of 35 and gradually declines with 
increasing age. LC25 is a conservative life cycle fund in 
which the exposure in equity investments starts at 25%  
until you are 35 years old and slowly reduces as you age.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
54 
 
Tax benefits of investing in NPS  
If you are an employed professional, the following table 
illustrates how you may avail of tax deductions while 
investing in an NPS.  
 
 
If you are a self-employed professional and invest in an NPS, 
you may claim a tax deduction of up to 20% of your gross 
income under Section 80 CCD (1) of the Income Tax Act, 
1961 within the overall limit of Rs. 1.5 lakhs per year.  
 
Withdrawal-related Norms in NPS 
 
Once you retire at the age of 60, you need to buy an annuity 
with a minimum of 40% of the accumulated wealth. You will 
receive the remaining 60% as a lump sum. In case you receive a 
Sections Description Deduction Limit  
80CCD (1) Your contribution 
towards NPS up to 10% 
of salary + dearness 
allowance 
Maximum Rs. 1.5 
lakhs 
80CCD (1B) Your further 
contributions to NPS 
Maximum Rs. 50,000 
80CCD (2) Your employer’s 
contributions to NPS 
Maximum 10% of 
basic + dearness 
allowance for private 
sector employees and 
up to 14% of basic + 
dearness allowance 
for govt. employees 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
55 
 
total corpus worth less than Rs. 2 lakhs, you may withdraw the 
entire amount. 
 
If you have been investing in an NPS for at least 3 years and 
wish to make an early withdrawal and exit, you may withdraw 
up to 25% of the investment for certain purposes like 
meeting expenses for your kid’s higher education or wedding, 
building/buying a h ouse, or paying for your or your family 
member’s medical treatment . However, do note that you 
may make a maximum of 3 withdrawals, and each 
withdrawal needs to have a gap of 5 years in the entire 
tenure. 
 
Account Categories under NPS 
 
Primarily, NPS has 2 account types, Tier I and Tier II. Tier I is 
the retirement account, which gets various tax breaks while Tier 
II is a voluntary account, enabling you to invest and withdraw 
anytime. You may invest in a Tier II account only if you have 
an active Tier I account. 
 
10. Mutual Funds 
 
A mutual fund offers you as an investor an opportunity to 
pool your money with other investors. Fund managers 
manage this pool of money and make decisions to buy and 
sell on behalf of the investors. Mutual funds invest in stocks, 
bonds, or other securities, in line with the fund’s objective. 
Asset Management Companies (AMCs) run and manage 
mutual fund schemes in India. There are over 40 AMCs in 
the country, and the Average Assets Under Management 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
56 
 
(AAUM) in the Indian mutual fund industry stood at Rs. 54.54 
lakhs crore as of 29th February 2024. As rightly stated by  
 
While investing in mutual funds, you have the flexibility to 
choose between regular or one -time investments. In return 
for your investment, you get a certain number of mutual 
fund units that you may redeem/sell back to the AMC in 
the future. Do remember that mutual funds cannot offer 
you any assured returns. All the returns are linked to the 
nature and performance of underlying assets like shares 
and bonds.  
 
 
 
  
DID YOU KNOW? 
NSDL has enabled holding of mutual fund units 
(represented by the Statement of Account) in demat 
form for its demat account holders. You may use 
your existing demat accounts to do the same. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
57 
 
Different Types of Mutual Fund Schemes  
 
1. Equity schemes/funds  
 
These funds invest in stocks or shares. Equity funds aim to 
grow faster than fixed-income funds and contain higher 
risk. This means there is a possibility of you incurring 
losses at least in the short term. You  may choose from 
different types of equity funds that invest in large-cap 
stocks, mid-cap stocks, small-cap stocks, or combinations 
of these. The recommended minimum tenure for 
investment in equity funds is 3 years or more. If you sell 
the units of your equity mutual funds in less than 1 year, 
you will need to pay a short-term capital gains (STCG) tax. 
Similarly, if you sell the units after 1 year, you will need to 
bear the long-term capital gains (LTCG) tax.  
 
 Taxation of equity mutual funds  
 
Holding Period Tax Category Tax (in %)  
Less than 1 year STCG 15% 
More than 1 year LTCG 10% without any 
indexation benefits 
 
Additionally, if you receive any dividend income, you are 
liable to pay tax according to your current tax slab. If the 
annual dividend received by you exceeds Rs. 5,000, the 
company distributing the dividends will deduct a 10% 
TDS. 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
58 
 
1. Debt/fixed-income schemes/funds  
 
These funds invest in debt/fixed -income securities and 
aim to provide you with stable returns and  capital 
protection. So, they are less risky compared to equity funds, 
ensuring minimal chances of any financial losses. You may 
consider investing in debt funds in the public or private 
sector. The minimum recommended tenure for staying 
invested in debt funds is up to 1 year.   
Taxation of debt funds   
Debt funds with a holding period of less than 3 years fall 
under the STCG tax category. Conversely, debt funds with 
a holding duration of over 3 years bear an LTCG tax. In 
any of these cases, you need to pay a tax according to your 
income slab rate, irrespective of your holding period.  
2. Hybrid schemes/funds  
Also referred to as balanced funds, hybrid funds invest in 
both equity and debt/fixed-income securities. The 
allocation mix depends on the specific fund objective. 
Hybrid funds aim to give the growth benefit of stocks but 
simultaneously ensure that some portion of the investment 
remains secure by investing in debt securities. In terms of 
risk and return, hybrid funds fall between  equity funds 
and debt funds. Hybrid funds are suitable for first -time 
investors who have previously been exposed to debt funds 
but are ready to take some more risk. The recommended 
investment tenure for hybrid funds is 3 years or more. 
You need to pay the tax on the gains earned from the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
59 
 
hybrid fund as per the fund’s equity allocation. If the net 
equity exposure is 65%, you will be taxed for this fund like 
an equity fund. However, if the net equity exposure is less 
than 65%, you will be taxed like a  debt fund. 
 
3. Solution-oriented schemes 
 
These include investing in specific schemes like childcare 
or retirement planning. Previously known as regular  equity 
or balanced schemes, these schemes are now referred to as 
solution-oriented schemes. These schemes are open -
ended, indicating you may buy and sell their units at any 
time. Solution-oriented schemes have a minimum lock -in 
period of 5 years. 
 
You may consider investing in these schemes if you have a 
specific goal like building a substantial corpus for 
retirement or to meet the future costs associated w ith your 
kid’s higher education or wedding. You may consider 
investing in these schemes if you are unable to select an 
appropriate mutual fund scheme or rebalance investment. 
Solution-oriented funds are more attractive in terms of 
returns compared to the investment plans offered by 
insurance companies. 
 
On the liquidity front, these schemes score less than other 
equity schemes due to the compulsory 5 -year lock-in period. 
So, if you are someone who can maintain regular investment 
discipline and needs a financial cushion to sail through in 
times of volatility, investing in these schemes may prove 
worthwhile. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
60 
 
4. Other schemes 
 
A few other types of mutual funds available for 
investments include money market funds, liquid funds, 
tax-saving funds, fixed maturity funds, income funds, 
growth funds, capital protection funds, and pension funds.   
 
Different Modes of Investing in Mutual Funds  
 
1. Lump sum 
 
It is a one-time investment. Many investors prefer this 
mode because there is no recurring liability. Investing a 
lump sum is good if you know how to time  your 
investment well. If not, it is advisable to avoid this route.  
Due to a lack of investment planning, many investors 
forcefully tend to opt for this investment mode  to meet a 
deadline. Select this route only if  you have a higher risk 
tolerance. 
 
2. Systematic Investment Plan (SIP)  
It is a better option for retail investors since it averages  the 
cost of investment. Do note that an SIP enables you to 
invest a large amount in smaller installments. So, you need 
not worry about timing the market because you are 
investing in varying market situations. However, each SIP 
has a specified restriction on investment.  If you wish to 
continue with automated and worry-free investing, stick to 
this mode.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
61 
 
A few plus points of investing in an SIP are:  
• Flexibility 
• Disciplined savings 
• Long-term gains 
 
3. Systematic Transfer Plan (STP) 
Generally, an investor opts for this route when they have a 
lump sum to invest. Like an SIP, an STP helps spread 
investments over a period of time to average the purchase 
cost. This method rules out the risk of getting into the 
market at its peak. With an STP, you may invest a lump 
sum in a scheme and transfer a fixed amount regularly to 
another scheme. You may do an STP from an equity fund 
DID YOU KNOW? 
According to AMFI, SIP’s share in mutual 
fund inflows has grown from approximately 
Rs.  7,500 crores in February 2021 to a record 
Rs.  17,610 crores in December 2023. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
62 
 
to a debt fund or vice-versa. This approach reduces the risk 
of investments being impacted when they are nearing 
maturity. Choosing this route can help you move your 
money wisely before you need it. 
4. Systematic Withdrawal Plan (SWP) 
As the name indicates, this is more of a withdrawal route than an 
investment one. However, SWP is worth mentioning because, at 
the end of the day, the crux of investment is all about managing 
your future requirements and expenditures. Let us explain the 
concept of an SWP with an illustration.  
As an investor, you have invested meticulously to build a 
substantial retirement corpus. Once you retire, you receive the 
payout as planned and have a good bank balance. However, if 
you are not proficient in managing the money wisely, you may 
end up spending it on unnecessary things, exposing the 
possibility of utilising the corpus and being left with less savings 
in old age. This is when an SWP comes to your rescue, as it 
ensures you lead a financially healthy life post-retirement and 
never run out of money. With an SWP, you pre-decide the 
amount of funds you wish to withdraw either monthly or 
quarterly to meet regular expenses, and the balance investment 
continues to earn returns, prolonging the longevity of your 
funds. 
How to Invest in Mutual Funds 
Irrespective of the mode of investment mentioned above, there are 
2 ways to invest in mutual funds either through a ‘regular plan’ or a 
‘direct plan’. The regular plan involves routing your investment 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
63 
 
through a mutual fund broker registered with the Association of 
Mutual Funds in India (AMFI). Conversely, if you wish to choose 
the direct plan, you may invest directly in your preferred mutual 
fund company. 
If you opt for the regular plan, you are liable to pay a commission 
to the distributor due to which your mutual fund scheme will have 
a slightly lower Net Asset Value (NAV) compared to the same 
scheme in the direct plan. You may opt for a direct plan only if 
you have the acumen to analyse and choose the right scheme. If 
not, you may start investing in mutual funds under the guidance 
of a registered distributor, and once you develop the expertise, 
you may invest independently via a direct plan in the future.  
 
Things to Know Before Investing in a Mutual Fund 
 
All the information related to a particular mutual fund scheme 
gets published by the concerned mutual fund company in the 
Scheme Information Document (SID), which is available on the 
websites of the AMFI, SEBI, and your AMC.  
 
You may have come across this disclaimer in all mutual fund 
advertisements: “Mutual fund investments are subject to market 
risks. Please read all scheme-related documents carefully before 
investing”. Now, let’s discuss these risks. 
 
Market risks associated with equity investment include changes 
in interest rates, foreign exchange risks, and commodity-related 
risks. In the case of mutual funds, there are additional risks, such 
as default risk and reinvestment risk. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
64 
 
Market risks exist in all investments, but the key issue is how a 
fund manager mitigates these risks without significantly 
impacting the performance. So, understanding the role of the 
fund manager is extremely critical for you as an investor. You 
need to be active in various aspects, such as selecting the 
investments, re-balancing risk versus return, monitoring the 
portfolio, formulating the exit strategy, and having complete 
knowledge of your fund manager and their previous work 
experiences if you wish to emerge as a successful investor.  
 
Guidelines to Follow  
• Read the offer document, such as the SID carefully to 
learn about some additional aspects like the purpose of 
your investment  
• Focus on the fund’s investment objectives. Clearly 
define the goal of each fund and accept that the fund 
manager will do their best to meet those objectives. 
• Understand and outline the general strategies the fund 
managers will implement in a fund. Past performance 
data listed in fund documents is of academic use only 
and does not indicate what is in store in the future.  
• Focus on fees and expenses of owning any fund. For 
instance, the different types of fees in a mutual fund 
investment include entry loads, exit loads, switching 
charges, annual recurring expenses, management fees, 
and investor servicing costs. Remember, actively 
managed funds charge more than same-sized passive 
funds like index schemes and Exchange-traded Funds 
(ETFs). 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
65 
 
11. Insurance Products 
 
The general perception of a life insurance policy among the 
public is that this product’s core motive is to provide financial 
protection in case of an unfortunate incident. However, over the 
years, the concept of a life insurance plan has evolved 
considerably. Today, different types of life insurance policies are 
available in the market.  
 
The most basic form of a life insurance plan is a term insurance 
policy, which provides insurance in case something untoward 
happens with the policyholder during the policy tenure.  
However, apart from this type, other life insurance policies 
provide a package of insurance if something unfortunate 
happens and a return on investment once the policy matures and 
if the policyholder outlives the tenure.  
 
There is a debate on whether investing in insurance policies can 
prove to be worthwhile or not in the long run. However, we will 
explain the pros and cons of that later. As most of these 
products offer insurance and you need to pay premiums for 
them, they are relatively unpopular when it comes to making the 
list of top investment avenues compared to core instruments like 
mutual funds. However, allocating a certain percentage of your 
portfolio to the investment products in the insurance segment 
may be beneficial in the long run. We will provide you with an 
in-depth explanation of these products in Chapter 5. 
 
12. Direct Equity/Shares/Stocks 
 
Stocks are a type of financial instrument that gives you a share of 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
66 
 
ownership in a company. As an investor, you may buy stocks for 
various reasons:  
• Capital appreciation, which occurs when a stock rises in 
price/value  
• Dividend payments, which you may receive when the 
company distributes some of its earnings/profits to 
stockholders. 
 
Demat is a form of holding or keeping stocks in an electronic 
form. It is a viable alternative to holding the securities in the 
physical/paper format. If you are a starter in stock investments, 
you will be pleased to know that we at NSDL offer demat 
account opening services through our Depository Participants 
(DPs). You will learn more about this in the later chapters. 
 
Stocks are an attractive wealth creation opportunity, providing 
lucrative returns on investment in the long term. The different 
categories of stocks include: 
 
1. Growth stocks   
 
These stocks have earnings growing at a faster rate than the 
average. Growth stocks rarely pay dividends. Investors buy them 
only in the hope of capital appreciation. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
67 
 
2. Income stocks   
These stocks pay dividends consistently. Investors buy them for 
the income they generate. Income stocks belong to mature 
companies having years of track record and solid finances. 
 
3. Value stocks  
These stocks have attractive pricing and they are cheaper 
compared to other categories of stocks because they have fallen 
out of favor among investors due to some issues. These stocks 
may be either growth-oriented or income-centric. Investors buy 
value stocks in the hope that someday the stock’s price will 
rebound. 
 
Further Categorisation of Stocks 
Another way to categorise stocks is by the size of the 
company, which is calculated by market capitalisation. 
There are large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap stocks. As the 
names indicate, large-cap stocks have an excellent track 
record as they are of a reputed organisation, while small-
cap stocks do not have a long track record, making them 
highly volatile. Additionally, there is another category of 
least-priced stocks that cost a few paise, known as penny 
stocks. 
 
Things to Know When Investing in Stocks  
 
You may have observed and experienced that certain 
investment avenues provide assured returns. However, 
stocks are different because they offer the greatest 
potential for growth by providing inflation -beating returns. 
Having said that, stock prices are not  one-dimensional, and 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
68 
 
they fluctuate as per the financial market’s scenario.  So, 
there is no sure-shot guarantee that the company whose stock 
you bought will grow. 
 
If you are a beginner in stock investing, remember there is a 
possibility of losing money due to market fluctuations. So, it 
is advisable to start by buying stocks of established large-cap 
companies that have a market cap of Rs. 20,000 crore or more, 
as they command a strong market presence. Additionally, avoid 
making investment-related decisions based on rumors and 
speculations. Learning the tricks of smart investing is better 
than hoping for miracles. 
 
7. Bonds/Debentures 
 
A bond is a debt security in which the bond’s issuer is obliged 
to pay you (the bondholder) an  interest (coupon).  
 
Unlike shares, bonds offer a guaranteed return and have a 
fixed maturity period after which they are redeemed. This 
makes your entry and exit time  defined. Conversely, stocks 
may be outstanding indefinitely and they do not have a 
fixed maturity tenure. 
 
The RBI issues bonds in India on behalf of the central 
government or state governments. Additionally, private 
sector companies float bonds. Bonds issued by the central 
government carry a sovereign guarantee and are the safest 
instrument. They carry virtually no risk and thus offer 
lower returns. Contrarily, pr ivate sector bonds/debt carry 
higher risk and promise a slightly higher return. In growing  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
69 
 
economies, the post-tax bond returns hardly beat inflation. 
Yet, bonds are favored because of their principal and 
interest protection benefits. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
70 
 
 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Saving and creating wealth is not enough. You need to invest 
in the right avenues. 
• Understanding your risk tolerance is critical before 
beginning your investment journey 
• investment avenues as per your financial goals 
• Taking too much or too little risk are both injurious to your 
financial health 
•
bonds offer capital protection and stability 
• Equity mutual funds are an indirect way of investing in 
stocks 
• Investing in different pension schemes introduced by the 
government can help you earn a stable pension post -
retirement even if you are a private sector employee  
• Investing in insurance-cum-investment products may fetch 
you lower returns but offer assured returns.  
• Investing in schemes like PPF and SSY can help you save 
tax and attain long-term financial goals 
• Investing in fixed deposits can provide you with the 
protection of principal and stability of interest income 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
71 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Asset Allocation 
 
When studying for exams, students try to cover the maximum number  of 
chapters from their course material because they do not know where the 
questions will exactly come from. Unfortunately,  when it comes to 
investments, we fail to do the same; we do not read in detail about the 
do’s & don’ts of investments. Driven by greed or fear, we invest all our 
money in few assets like stocks, bank FDs, or gold. The lack of asset 
allocation has negative effects on wealth creation.  
This chapter will answer fundamental topics like the concept of asset 
allocation, techniques to lower risk by spreading investments in different 
asset classes, and simple ways to allocate assets efficiently.  
What Is Asset Allocation? 
 
Asset allocation may sound like a complex term. But, in 
practicality, we follow its fundamental principles daily. 
Asset allocation works broadly by dividing your 
investment across various unrelated asset classes, such as 
Equity, Mutual Funds, Government Securities, Sovereign 
Gold Bonds, real estate, physical gold, liquid cash in case of 
emergencies etc. You may decide how much percent of 
your investment you wish to allocate to these different asset 
classes. By spreading your investments across different 
asset classes, you reduce the risk potential compared to 
allocating 100% of your investments in a single asset class. 
Since all the asset classes do not move in tandem, asset 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
72 
 
allocation is an easy way to control investment -related 
risks. 
 
Here’s what noted American business author and 
consultant for Fortune 500 companies, Michael LeBouef, 
has to say about the significance of asset allocation in any 
investment portfolio, and we completely agree with him:  
What Is an Asset Class? 
An asset class is a broad category of investments with similar 
characteristics, risks, and potential returns. It helps investors 
categorise their investments and understand the trade-offs 
between risk and reward. 
Different types of asset classes 
1. Stocks or equities 
An equity investment is the money invested in an organisation by 
buying its share on a stock exchange. As an investor 
(shareholder), you may potentially profit from equities if 
the company’s share price appreciates or if you receive 
quarterly or annual dividends from the company. The 
main asset class of stocks/equities is further divided into 
small-cap, mid-cap, and large-cap. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
73 
 
 
Investing in equities (stocks) means owning a portion of a 
publicly traded company. These shares can be bought and 
sold on stock exchanges. One way to invest in equities is 
through mutual funds, which pool money from multiple 
investors to buy a variety of stocks. 
Investors can benefit from equities in two ways: capital 
appreciation and dividends. Capital appreciation occurs when 
the stock price increases over time. Dividends are payments 
made by the company to its shareholders, often representing a 
portion of the company's profits. 
 
While equities offer the potential for significant returns, they 
also carry risks, such as market fluctuations and the possibility of 
DID YOU KNOW? 
The Total Market Capitalization of the 
Indian Stock Market (Bombay Stock 
Exchange) is about USD 5 trillion as of 
June 2024. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
74 
 
losing your investment. So, you need to do thorough research 
about a company before investing in its stocks.  
 
2. Bonds or other fixed-income investments 
Fixed-income investments are investments in debt 
securities. If you invest in these instruments, you will earn 
a fixed rate of return. All fixed-income investments offer a 
predetermined return. These investments are less risky 
than other asset classes. 
Fixed-income investments are investments in debt 
securities. If you invest in these instruments, you will earn 
a fixed rate of return. All fixed-income investments offer a 
predetermined return. These investments are less risky 
than other asset classes. 
 
It's important to note that while debt assets can provide a 
relatively stable income stream, they are not risk-free. 
Factors like interest rate changes and the issuer's 
creditworthiness can impact their performance. When investing 
in debt assets, it's essential to consider your risk tolerance, 
investment goals, and time horizon. 
3. Cash or cash equivalents  
A big plus point of investing in cash or cash equivalent 
investments is that you may easily access and liquidate 
them in the case of a financial emergency. This asset class 
helps in buying other asset classes during sharp price 
correction. If you allocate a specific percentage of your 
investment portfolio to this asset class, that particular 
portion will be protected from any sharp price drops.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
75 
 
Cash is a simple, liquid form of investment because you can 
freely choose to spend or save it as per your needs. Keeping it in 
a savings account is a low-risk strategy, but the interest rate is 
also quite low at ~3-4% and could easily be overwhelmed by 
inflation. In other words, this is a safe investment but will not 
help much with wealth creation. A big plus point of investing in 
cash or cash equivalent investments is that you may easily access 
and liquidate them in the case of a financial emergency. This 
asset class helps in buying other asset classes during sharp price 
correction. 
 
4. Gold 
 
Gold is a highly liquid but equally scarce asset. It is a luxury 
product and a promising investment avenue. In an investment 
portfolio, gold offers long-term returns. It can help reduce 
losses when the stock market is going through a turbulent 
phase. It is a liquid asset with no credit risk.  
 
Gold has been a valuable asset for centuries, prized for its 
beauty, durability, and scarcity. As an investment, gold offers 
unique characteristics that make it a distinct asset class. Gold is 
often seen as a hedge against inflation. When prices rise, the 
value of gold tends to increase, providing a potential safeguard 
against the erosion of purchasing power.  Gold can help 
diversify an investment portfolio. Its low correlation with 
traditional assets like stocks and bonds can reduce overall risk. 
There are many ways to invest in Gold like buying physical gold, 
Gold ETFs, and Sovereign Gold Bonds (SGBs), which are 
government securities denominated in grams of gold. They are 
substitutes for holding physical gold. Investors have to pay the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
76 
 
issue price in cash and the bonds will be redeemed in cash on 
maturity. SGBs bear interest at the rate of 2.50 per cent (fixed 
rate) per annum on the amount of initial investment. 
 
5. Real estate or other tangible assets 
 
Real estate and other physical assets fall under a separate 
asset class. If you wish to invest in avenues that offer 
protection against inflation, investing in real estate may 
prove worthwhile. 
 
6. Alternatives 
 
The alternative asset class covers securities that do not come 
under any of the traditional categories. They are complex in 
structure and thus, less popular among the general public. They 
are usually held by high-net worth individuals and institutional 
investors. Some alternative investments include private equity, 
hedge funds, artworks, and antiques. With innovations in the 
financial market, these instruments have become more 
approachable for smaller investors through ETFs and SIPs. 
 
What Is the Main Objective of Asset Allocation? 
 
The core motive of asset allocation is to minimise losses, 
as doing so will eventually result in more gains.   
 
Many investors use asset allocation to minimise volatility. If 
you are unaware of what volatility means, in simple words, it 
is the swing due to which an asset gets impacted. Here is an 
illustration to give you better clarity. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
77 
 
If asset ‘A’ gives a 100% return this year and falls  by 50% the 
next year, it is highly volatile. All investors want to have asset 
‘A’ in their portfolio when it gives a 100% return. However, 
the same investors will wish to avoid asset ‘A’ in the year 
when it falls by 50%.  
 
So, when you invest your money wisely across different 
assets, you can safeguard your wealth by not heavily 
investing in assets that are likely  to fall in value. By having 
more exposure to potentially promising assets, you 
automatically stand a higher chance of earning higher 
returns on investment. 
 
Allocating or dividing your investment does not mean 
blindly investing in different asset classes in varying 
proportions without analytical research. Doing this may 
prove costly. For instance, in 2008, the value of most of 
the financial assets fell, and only gold did well. So, if you 
divide your investments equally among all asset classes, you 
may still experience losses, particularly during unfavorable 
market conditions.  
 
Asset allocation works based on a few theories. Firstly, all 
the asset categories do not fall or rise at the same time. 
Secondly, all the asset categories do not behave in a similar 
manner simultaneously to the same market forces.  
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
78 
 
Why Does Asset Allocation Work? 
 
If you divide your money into different assets, does it work? 
The answer depends on how you define the ‘work’ in this 
context. 
 
If your investments in an asset category are performing 
poorly, asset allocation will ensure you have well -
performing assets in another category.  
 
Any gains in the well-performing asset class may offset the 
losses in the poor-performing ones. This means both your 
gains and losses reduce as far as the overall effect on your 
portfolio is concerned. So, if your goal is to ensure lower 
risk and minimal losses, asset allocation will wonderfully work 
for you. 
 
If your goal is to avoid investing in low-performing assets 
and always stay invested in high -performing assets, this 
will be tough to achieve. The truth is, neither you nor a 
skilled investment professional knows the accurate  amount 
of gains or losses one or many assets will make. The 
benefit is available only in hindsight.  
 
Important Tips While Starting Asset Allocation 
 
You need to acquire sound knowledge of asset allocation if 
you are a novice investor. Conversely, if you are a 
seasoned investor, but have put all your investments in 
only a single asset like stocks, mutual funds, or fixed 
deposits, it is time to learn about asset allocation and 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
79 
 
diversify your financial portfolio across different asset 
classes. If you have only invested in a single asset and that 
particular asset has a rough patch for 1 year, your wealth 
may decline significantly in this scenario.  
 
You may do asset allocation independently by watching 
financial news and reacting to financial market trends. 
Alternatively, you may seek professional advice from any 
investment advisor registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (SEBI).  
 
To start doing asset allocation, you need to train your 
mind well to generate substantial wealth in the long run. 
Here’s what noted American businessman and author 
Robert Kiyosaki, known for the bestselling book on 
personal finance ‘Rich Dad Poor Dad’, say s about our 
mind being the “single most powerful asset.”  
Returns Generated Across Different Asset Classes from 2019-23 
 
Below is a table representing the statistical data of 
performance across various asset classes, such as stocks, 
bonds, gold, and real estate from 2019 -23, to give you an 
idea of which avenue can be more profitable for you if 
you are planning to invest for a longer duration.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
80 
 
 
Investment Avenue  Approximate Returns 
Generated  
Stocks/Equities  12-12.5%  
Bonds/Debt  6-6.5%  
Gold  14%  
Real Estate  3% 
 
Factors to Consider While Starting Asset Allocation  
 
1. Number of asset categories to be present in your portfolio 
 
When you are beginning the asset allocation process, you may broadly 
classify asset categories (classes) into two segments-traditional and 
alternative. Following is a tabular breakdown of these categories with 
the investment instruments that come under them.  
 
Traditional 
 
Alternative 
Stocks Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) 
Bonds Infrastructure Investment Trusts (INVITs) 
Gold   SGBs 
Cash 
Commodities 
Real Estate 
                                                                                 
Select government-regulated assets that have credible markets 
where you may buy and sell them through registered 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
81 
 
intermediaries to ensure proper allocation. 
 
2. Percentage of allocation to different assets  
 
You need to take a tactical call whether you plan to 
allocate 50% of your investment portfolio to stock and 
split the balance 50% equally among debt, gold, and 
cash. Or, if you plan to divide the investment portfolio 
equally among stocks, debt, gold, and c ash, by allocating 
25% to each of these avenues. Your decision will depend 
on your portfolio’s size, risk tolerance, investment goals, 
and estimated investment period.  
 
Fundamentally, all assets have the reputation of 
generating positive returns, but every asset is unique in 
some respect. For instance, it is advisable to stay 
invested in stocks for a minimum duration of three to 
five years to earn favorable returns. Simil arly, you may 
give avenues like debt and cash 1 year to earn positive 
returns. So, if your projected investment duration is less 
than five years, do not include stocks in your portfolio.  
 
3. Asset allocation model  
 
You need to be certain about which asset allocation model to follow 
to make the most of your investments. The different models include: 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
82 
 
Static asset allocation  
 
It involves an annual rebalancing exercise. It is split between 
different assets at the same level before the year begins. 
  
Tactical asset allocation   
 
As the name indicates, this model involves tactically modifying 
the proportion of various asset classes in your investment 
portfolio to benefit from the changing market scenario. 
Following this model can be useful if you wish to take advantage 
of short-term bearish and bullish scenarios in debt and equity 
markets. 
 
Dynamic asset allocation   
 
It is similar to tactical asset allocation. The only difference 
between the two models is that in tactical asset allocation, you 
need to buy and sell investments manually, whereas dynamic 
asset allocation involves the usage of automated systems based 
on financial models. 
  
Strategic asset allocation  
 
It involves determining and maintaining an appropriate ratio of 
different asset classes in your investment portfolio based on 
aspects like your risk tolerance and age. This model involves 
periodic portfolio rebalancing to ensure the proportion of assets 
is maintained at the specified levels.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
83 
 
For instance, when you are in your 20s, your risk tolerance is 
high. So, you may allocate a high proportion of your investment, 
say about 75%, to the equity asset class. However, once you 
reach your late 30s or early 40s, your risk tolerance will reduce. 
So, with this model, the proportion of investment allocated to 
the equity asset class reduces strategically as you age.   
 
4. Investor’s age 
 
Your age is a crucial factor to ensure efficient asset allocation for 
the long term. A smart approach you may follow while doing 
asset allocation by age is the ‘Rule of 100’.  
For instance, if your current age is 30, you may deduct 30 from 
100, and the number you get may be the proportion of equity in 
your investment portfolio. So, in this scenario, you may allocate 
70% (100-30) of your total investment in equity, and the balance 
is other asset classes like debt and gold, as you are a young 
investor who aspires to stay invested for the long-term. So, as 
your age increases, you may lower the investments in equity and 
transfer them to debt and gold for capital preservation. 
 
The following pie chart explains an effective asset allocation for 
a 30-year-old investor. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
84 
 
 
 
Why Is Asset Allocation Necessary? 
 
Asset allocation helps weigh stocks, bonds, and cash tactfully in 
a portfolio. The critical founding stone for successful asset 
allocation is portfolio construction. If you invest a majority of 
your savings in bonds or cash, you will experience low volatility 
but will be unable to earn lucrative, inflation-beating returns in 
the long run. Conversely, if you invest heavily in stocks, you 
may earn substantial returns over a long period.  
 
However, by investing in this asset class, your investment’s 
value may be subject to market swings for durations when 
the stock market is going through a turbulent phase. So, 
asset allocation is essential to have a balanced and 
diversified investment portfolio.  
 

 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
85 
 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Asset Allocation 
Every investment concept has its pros and cons, and asset 
allocation is no exception. 
Advantages 
1. Better returns 
The frequent adjustments in the mix of assets can 
possibly provide higher returns on the investment 
portfolio. The portfolio adjustments can prevent losses 
from unexpected market downturns and capture the 
momentum to increase the returns. 
 
2. Adjustment to market changes 
Unlike static asset allocation, dynamic asset allocation is 
highly flexible. A dynamic strategy can quickly respond to 
market fluctuations. Following this strategy may prove 
worthwhile and help you generate higher returns than 
what the stock market would usually offer.  
 
Disadvantages 
 
1. Transaction costs and difficulty in execution  
 
Asset allocation involves frequent rebalancing of weights 
across different asset classes inside the portfolio, indicating 
higher transaction costs and portfolio turnover. 
Additionally, it is hard to achieve accurate asset  allocation, 
given the fluid nature of financial markets. So, following 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
86 
 
the asset allocation route for your investment portfolio is 
not a sure-shot guarantee for success.  
2. Active management is required 
If your investment company has assigned a portfolio 
manager to handle your portfolio, that individual’s skills 
play an integral role in maintaining tight control of the 
portfolio. So, when the portfolio manager quits the 
company and gets replaced by anothe r professional, the 
level of skills, market predictability, and execution 
capabilities also change, as these qualities are subjective 
and differ among people.  
Having thorough knowledge of aspects like entering the 
right asset at the right time and exiting the wrong  asset at 
the right time becomes extremely critical for dynamic asset 
allocation to work. So, you cannot be completely 
dependent on the portfolio manager and need to educate 
yourself about these concepts to be on top of your game 
as a well-informed investor. 
Why Should You Diversify Your Investments? 
Diversification is the practice of spreading your 
investments, ensuring your exposure to any single type of 
asset gets capped. This practice is designed to help reduce 
the volatility of your investment portfolio over time. A key 
to successful investing is to learn how  to balance your 
comfort level with risk during your investment period. 
• If you invest your retirement corpus too conservatively 
at a young age, there is a high possibility that the 
growth rate of your investments will not generate 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
87 
 
inflation-beating returns 
 
• If you invest too aggressively when you are older, you 
may end up exposing your savings to market volatility. This 
would erode the value of your assets at an age when 
you have fewer opportunities to recoup your losses.  
 
One way to balance risk and reward in your investment 
portfolio is to diversify your assets. It is a simple and 
powerful idea of spreading your portfolio across several 
asset classes. It can help mitigate the risk and volatility in 
your portfolio, potentially reducing the number and 
severity of stomach-churning ups and downs. However, do 
note that diversification does not ensure a confirmed 
profit or provide 100% protection against losses.  
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
88 
 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Plan your long-term financial future and favorable returns 
with effective asset allocation of your investments  
• Balance risk and reward for the long-term with asset 
allocation 
• Avoid too much exposure of your investment portfolio 
in one asset class 
• Do note that all assets do not move in the same way at 
the same time. The goal of asset allocation is to protect 
you from losses. Know your investment goal, period, and 
risk tolerance and make tactical decisions. 
• Take a measured approach if you opt for static asset 
allocation 
• Be particular in effective asset allocation if you do not 
have the time to re-balance 
• Remember that despite best attempts, you may not 
emerge as a roaring winner because asset allocation 
(diversification) does not guarantee sure-shot profits 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
89 
 
CHAPTER 5 
Insurance Fundas 
 
A few years ago, the mere mention of the word ‘insurance’ brought  to 
mind the spectacled insurance agent who forced you to buy a policy every 
few years. The selling of insurance may have changed, but its importance 
still remains the same even today. All of us need financial protection 
from unforeseen circumstances. With insurance, you can always cover the 
risk that may arise at any time. 
In this chapter, we will learn about the basics of insurance, why you 
should not mix insurance with investment, and much more. Read on. 
Life Insurance – An Understanding  
You may have an umbrella at home but use it only for a 
few weeks in a year. However, you keep it because it will 
come in handy on a rainy day. The concept of life 
insurance works similarly. You may not need it now, but 
you need to invest in it, as it can function as an um brella in 
case of unexpected adversities.  
 
You may have different plans for the future, but life is 
uncertain, and these uncertainties may get the better of 
you. However, even after a tragic event, your long -term 
financial goals and obligations as a parent, wife/husband, 
or son/daughter will remain. Your responsibilities do not 
change if you are absent or disabled.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
90 
 
Life insurance is a financial cover for protection from risks 
linked with human life. Events like death, disability, and 
accidents can cause financial harm. As humans, our lives 
are subject to risk of death and disability. Irrespective of 
the cause, the outcome of such risks is always negative.  
 
When an individual dies or gets disabled, it is not only a 
physical loss but also a financial one. Due to such 
incidents, the impacted individual’s family faces a loss of 
income. Although it is impossible to value human life in 
monetary terms, it is possible to compensate for the loss 
of household income by giving the family financial 
assistance either in lump sum or installments. You may 
determine this value based on the loss of income in future 
years. This value is known as ‘sum assured’ in life 
insurance. It is a finite amount provided to the 
policyholder’s family if the policyholder dies or becomes 
disabled due to an accident during the policy tenure.  
 
Reasons to Buy Life Insurance  
 
Life insurance is needed: 
 
• To ensure financial support for your immediate family if 
something unfortunate happens to you  
• To finance your kid’s education and other needs in case 
of your untimely absence 
• To compensate for the loss of income that may arise 
due to a critical illness or accident 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
91 
 
Here are a few core characteristics of a life insurance policy that 
signify the need to invest in it. 
 
1. It is an investment for your family and not merely 
for you 
 
You may not realise this, but investing in life insurance is 
the best way to shield your loved ones. Death is an 
inevitable event, but its time, place, and cause are not. 
However, your loved ones will continue to live even when 
you are not with them. So, buying life insurance is a 
financial decision based on strong emotions. It is about 
providing financial comfort to your dear ones and 
protecting them from future uncertainties.   
 
Life is about meeting responsibilities and keeping 
promises. Anyone who decides to buy  life insurance looks 
at it from the family’s point of view because probably it is 
the only product where you do not look at your interests.  
 
A life insurance policy is a powerful tool that protects your 
spouse and children from the financial losses that may 
devastate their lives. 
 
2. It is bought while living but is useful after death  
 
Life insurance is about life after death. Here, we are not 
referring to the life of the policyholder, but the financial 
assurance that the family members will get after the death 
of the policyholder. Life insurance is about taking care of 
your loved ones if anything tragic happens to you. The life 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
92 
 
insurance policy you buy is to protect and provide 
financial relief to those who will be left behind, as they will 
need to continue with their lives even in your absence. So, 
you need to buy life insurance for their financial safety. 
While you are alive, you can ring -fence them in such a way 
that they will always remain financially secure.  
 
 
 
3. It is an expression of love and caring  
 
Many celebrate Valentine’s Day every year to showcase their 
love and care for their loved ones It shows you care for 
each other. Similarly, life insurance is about caring for your 
family. You want to ensure their financial security  if you 
DID YOU KNOW? 
 
India’s overall insurance penetration 
dropped from 4.2% in FY 2021-22 to 4% in 
FY 2022-23 as per IRDAI’s annual report. 
 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
93 
 
are suddenly not around. In such a scenario, the proceeds of 
a life insurance policy will help you keep the promises, 
ensuring your family does not face any financial setbacks. 
When you invest in a life insurance policy, you protect 
your family’s financial future by enabling them to maintain 
their current lifestyle even if you are not with them. 
 
4. It enables your loved ones to buy time  
 
When the main or lone breadwinner of a family dies, life 
can be difficult. It is impossible to meet expenses without 
any income. Life insurance acts like a safety net in such 
turbulent times. It is an alternative to the loss of income. 
Life insurance ensures that your surviving family members 
need not have to make tough decisions forcefully.  
 
At a time when your grieving family members may not be in 
an emotionally stable state to make correct life decisions, life 
insurance gives them a  chance. They get time to adjust to the 
tragic turn of events. For instance, in case of an unfavorable 
incident, your spouse ``need not find a new job immediately. 
Or, your kids need not stop pursuing their education. It is 
because they would have funds to meet their expenses with 
the life insurance payout.  
  
Who Needs Life Insurance? 
Anyone who has a family to support and earns monthly 
income needs to buy insurance.  Our economic value goes 
beyond just a few months. In a sense, we are like a bank 
fixed deposit that pays interest every month to help 
support and fulfill the family’s dreams.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
94 
 
The general rule is you need to buy life insurance if you 
have dependents. A dependent is an individual who relies 
on your financial support. They may include your spouse, 
aging parents, children, siblings, and other relatives. These 
people may be younger or older than the policyholder. It is  
because the dependent’s age is not as  important as the 
policy’s purpose to replace your economic value in case of 
your absence.  
 
Many people buy life insurance policies when they get 
married. Others buy life insurance when they are expecting 
their first child. However, your spouse and children are 
dependents who may come later in life. Your dependents 
may also be your parents, and if you are unmarried but the 
family’s sole breadwinner, do not wait until your wedding 
and buy a life insurance policy without any delay.  
 
In the future, once you reach retirement age, there may be 
less requirement for life insurance. It is because, by the 
time you retire, your kids will most likely be financially 
independent. Additionally, during this phase of life, you 
will have no major financial obligations like repayment of 
a home loan and will live on retirement savings. However,  
if you feel your spouse may need extra money to cover 
unexpected medical and long-term care expenses, stay 
invested in a life insurance policy. 
 
Another important reason to buy life insurance is if you 
have taken a home loan. It is common to sign up for a 20-
year home loan. However, what if something adverse 
happens to you in 10 years?  There are life insurance 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
95 
 
policies directly linked to home loans. So, in case of the 
borrower’s premature demise, the insurance policy repays 
the entire loan, ensuring the home remains with the 
borrower’s family. 
 
Different Types of Life Insurance Policies 
 
Term insurance   
A term insurance plan is the most basic type of life 
insurance policy. It provides life insurance coverage with 
no savings or profits component. It is the most affordable 
life insurance plan and comes at the cheapest premium 
compared to other types of life insurance policies. As per a 
term insurance policy, if the policyholder passes away 
during the policy period, their beneficiaries receive the 
sum assured from the insurance company. This amount is 
known as the death benefit. If the policyholder survives, 
the beneficiaries do not receive any payout.  
 
Endowment plan 
An endowment plan contains life insurance but also offers 
a maturity benefit. Unlike a term plan, which pays the sum 
assured only in case of the policyholder’s demise, an 
endowment plan pays the sum assured under both 
scenarios, death and survival. So, it comes at a higher 
premium compared to a term plan.  
 
An endowment plan provides you with a combination of 
insurance and savings. In this plan, the insurance company 
keeps a specified amount for life cover and invests the 
balance. An endowment plan offers either a death benefit 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
96 
 
when the policyholder dies or a maturity benefit when the 
policyholder outlives the policy duration.  Such plans may 
offer bonuses periodically to attract customers. Endowment 
plans are commonly referred to as traditional life insurance 
policies. They carry lower risk than Unit -linked Insurance 
Plans (ULIPs) but offer  lower returns. Any investment made 
in an endowment plan and the maturity/death benefit 
received are tax-free. 
 
Unit-linked insurance plan  
 
It is a combination of insurance and investment. The 
premium paid towards a ULIP is partly used as a risk cover 
for life insurance. The insurance company invests a large 
portion of the ULIP premium in funds. You may invest in 
different funds offered by the insurer depending o n your 
risk tolerance level. ULIPs are a close competitor of 
mutual funds when it comes to earning high returns on 
investment. However, costs associated with the ULIP 
structure make this investment -cum-insurance product 
competitive only if you hold it for the long term. ULIPs 
can help you save taxes on investment, and their corpus is 
tax-free. 
 
There are many similarities between ULIPs and mutual 
funds, but ULIPs also contain the plus point of being an  
insurance-oriented product. Conversely, mutual funds are 
a pure investment avenue with no insurance benefits.  
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
97 
 
Money-back policy 
 
A money-back policy is a variant of the endowment plan. 
In this policy, you get periodic payments over the policy 
term. Here, you receive a portion of the sum assured at 
regular intervals. If the policyholder outlives the term, they 
get the balance sum assured. However, if they do not 
survive during the policy tenure, their beneficiary gets the 
full sum assured. 
 
Money-back plans are also eligible to receive the bonuses 
declared by the company. Like other insurance products, a 
money-back policy is a tax-saving avenue, and its returns 
are tax-free for the policyholder/legal heir/nominee.  
 
Why Should You Not Mix Insurance with Other 
Investment Avenues?  
 
When you invest your hard-earned money somewhere, you 
may expect returns. This approach holds true, especially for 
pure investment avenues. So, is a term insurance plan  an 
investment avenue? No. Life insurance is not an 
investment. In life insurance, if the policyholder dies, their 
nominee /beneficiary gets the money. In any investment, 
you, as an investor, enjoy the returns. In the case  of life 
insurance, the death benefit is designed in such a manner 
that the policyholder cannot reap its financial benefits.   
 
You may wonder how other life insurance policies, barring 
term insurance plans, give maturity benefits to the 
policyholder. Well, those policies are not pure term insurance 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
98 
 
plans. In their bid to earn some returns from the premiums 
paid to the insurance company, many policyholders opt for  
insurance policies that give ‘something back’. T h e s e  
p o l i c i e s  a r e  n o t  insurance; they have an element of 
investment. Term insurance is the purest, cheapest, and best 
form of life insurance. Apart from term insurance,  any other 
form of life insurance is costlier.  
 
Remember the death benefit of a term life insurance policy 
is its only advantage. When you buy any other form of 
insurance, such as a money-back plan or an endowment 
plan, you are not buying pure insurance. You are paying 
for a package of insurance and investment. With  so many 
investment avenues available in the market, there  is little 
reason to buy an insurance policy for investment purposes. 
 
In a term plan, you pay a premium for covering a specific 
risk. If the risk doesn’t happen, you lose the premium. It is 
fine because you pay a nominal amount. But if the risk 
event occurs, your nominee/beneficiary gets the promised 
money. So, a term plan comes at a low premium.  If you 
wish to invest, consider putting your money in pure 
instruments like direct stocks and mutual funds. But, do not 
buy life insurance policies to merely invest. 
 
How Much Insurance Do You Need? 
 
All of us face this question in the process of buying life 
insurance. While deciding the extent or quantum of 
coverage, remember that the main objective of insurance is 
to provide financial support to your dependents. Naturally, 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
99 
 
the life insurance cover you determine must support them 
adequately for the longest period.  
 
The process of how much insurance you need starts by 
identifying your financial goals. Your goals will remain 
even if something unfortunate happens prematurely to 
you. So, the life insurance cover will be the sum of meeting 
these goals. 
 
Here are two pivotal factors that may help you decide the ideal 
life insurance amount you may require: 
 
1. Your current income  
 
In case of an untoward event, you will need to ensure your 
family survives for at least 20 years. So, multiply your 
annual income by 20. So, if your current yearly income is Rs. 
5 lakhs, multiply it by 20 and your life insurance cover 
should be a minimum of Rs. 1 crore (Rs. 5 lakhs x 20). 
 
2. Your current and future financial liabilities 
 
List your present and future financial liabilities to calculate 
the required life insurance cover. Your present financial 
obligations may be a car loan, home loan, and education 
loan. In case something happens to you unexpectedly, 
your family will not be able to pay the loan EM Is with the 
household expenses. So, add these loans to your life 
insurance coverage. Include future liabilities/long -term 
financial goals like your kid’s education/wedding, as they 
need to be accomplished even in your absence. So,  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
100 
 
estimate the amount for such future liabilities and add to 
the calculation. For instance, if your total outstanding 
loans are Rs. 35 lakhs, your insurance cover has to be Rs. 1 
crore plus Rs. 35 lakhs. If your future liabilities are worth 
Rs. 50 lakhs, the total cover amount must be Rs. 1 crore + 
Rs. 35 lakhs + Rs. 50 lakhs = Rs. 1.85 crore. 
 
Why Are Insurance Claims Rejected? 
 
Even after buying life insurance, many families discover 
that at the claim stage, their policies are worthless, and 
they face rejections. Here are some reasons for that:  
 
1. Incorrect information given at the time of  application  
 
Insurance operates on the principle of trust. So, any form 
of misrepresentation of data is bad for life insurance 
claims. Providing wrong information about age, income, 
occupation, qualifications, lifestyle, and medical history 
will open the door for rejected claims  in the future. 
 
2. Non-disclosure of  medical status 
 
The willful non-disclosure of previous and existing medical 
conditions, operations, and surgeries leads to claim 
rejections. The insurance company needs accurate 
information about your medical history to calculate the 
policy premium. If you give wrong information, the entire 
premise of the policy is based on falsehood. When this 
gets discovered, the insurer may reject the claim.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
101 
 
3. Policy lapse due to non-payment of premium 
 
Do remember life insurance claims are settled only for 
active insurance policies. If you do not pay the premium 
within the allocated period, the life insurance  policy gets 
lapsed. This can happen if you have missed paying the 
premium. If the policy is not active, the insurance 
company will not entertain any claims. You may consider 
using the direct bank debit facility to never miss an 
insurance premium payment.  
 
 
What Is an Electronic Insurance Account/e-Insurance 
Account (eIA)? 
As the name indicates, an eIA is the portfolio of a 
policyholder’s insurance policies held in an electronic form 
with an insurance repository. It facilitates the policyholder 
by providing instant access to the insurance portfolio on 
the Internet. It helps an eIA holder  keep track of their life 
insurance and non-life insurance policies under one 
umbrella. 
 
What is the NSDL National Insurance Repository (NIR)? 
 
NSDL Database Management Limited (NDML), formed in 
2004, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of National Securities 
Depository Limited. (NSDL). NDML has received approval 
from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
of India (IRDAI) for setting up an ‘ Insurance Repository’ 
named NSDL National Insurance Repository (NIR).  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
102 
 
 
NIR facilitates the holding of all types of insurance policies 
in electronic form in a single eIA. So, you are free from the 
hassles of holding all insurance policies in physical form. 
NIR also provides you with the facility to convert existing 
paper policies into electronic form.  
 
Key Offerings of NIR 
• It is an internet-based application 
• It allows you access based on login ID and password 
• It permits a single view of all insurance policies  
• It facilitates online payment of premium 
• It helps in sending alerts and messages on transactions 
and modifications 
 
Benefits Provided by NIR for an eIA Policyholder 
 
1. Policy servicing 
NIR enables single request contact details updating, 
premium alerts and payment for all insurers, an increased 
number of service touchpoints, and ease in registering 
bank account details for premium payment and maturity 
payouts. 
 
2. Convenience 
NIR facilitates one-time KYC updating, storage of policies 
in e-format, retaining all insurance policies under a single 
umbrella, and the advantage of a consolidated insurance 
statement annually.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
103 
 
 
3. Claim intimation 
NIR not only provides the facility to an authorised person 
to get a single view of all policies in case of the eIA 
holder’s death, but it is also useful in one -time claim 
intimation. 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
104 
 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Invest in life insurance because it is a financial cover for 
protection from risks linked with human life. It ensures 
your immediate family has financial support in case of an 
unfortunate event leading to your absence. 
• Buy life insurance if you have dependents and liabilities. 
Term insurance is the simplest, best, and cheapest form 
of life insurance policy available. 
• Do not mix insurance with investment 
• Ensure the life insurance coverage value you select should 
support your family for the longest duration 
• Remember life insurance claims may be rejected due to 
false/incomplete information or non-payment of 
premium. So, make it a point to provide correct 
information to your insurance provider and pay all 
premiums on time.   
• Open an ‘e-Insurance Account’ (eIA) to hold policies in 
an electronic form with an insurance repository 
• Utilise the benefits offered by NSDL National Insurance 
Repository (NIR) 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
105 
 
CHAPTER 6 
Prepare for Retirement 
Turning 60 years old is an uncertain time for most private sector 
employees. Once they retire, they do not earn any monthly salary. 
Retirement is about finally getting time, but it also marks a phase when 
your savings need to fund your expenses. Government sector employees 
have pensions, but a majority of private sector employees do not have this 
income alternative. Let us tell you how to prepare for a happy, peaceful, 
and independent retired life. 
Retirement Planning  
Every plan is assured of an outcome. Irrespective of 
whether an individual’s age is 30 or 54, retirement is 
inevitable. The earlier you prepare, the better it will be.  
At its core, retirement planning is all about ensuring you 
take care of your daily expenses through a regular flow of 
income after retirement. Retirement  planning involves: 
• Doing disciplined saving  
• Investing these savings in promising avenues for 
building a sufficient retirement corpus  
• Ensuring a judicious drawdown in the post -retirement 
phase, as indiscriminate withdrawals may result in the 
precious corpus getting exhausted quickly  
The best way to achieve all this is by joining a 
pension/retirement plan at an early stage in life. As you 
work and save, your retirement corpus rises. The day you 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
106 
 
retire from professional employment, you receive a steady 
flow of income as a pension.  
You may have successfully overcome many hurdles in your 
career and personal life. However, living a comfortable post -
retirement life is a big challenge. In all the previous 
challenges, you had a regular income, as you were legally 
eligible to earn money. However, retirement is all about 
living without any salary, and it requires mental 
adjustment. 
Having said that, retirement is not an end but a transition 
in life. It is merely changing the speed of your car from a 
fast lane to a slower one. Retirement is all about saying 
goodbye to the usual hustle and reinventing yourself by 
discovering the hidden talents within you.  
 
How to Prepare for Salary Loss  
 
Receiving your last salary is an emotionally heartening 
moment because you know you will not receive it 
anymore. However, the positive side to this development 
in life is you are aware of this reality for many years. 
Planning for uncertainties is difficult . However, it is simple 
to plan for expected life events.  
 
Most people earn regular income in the form of a monthly 
salary. Due to this stable flow of income, individuals tend 
to adapt their spending habits according to the monthly 
salary they receive. For instance, if an individual earns Rs. 
65,000 per month, their expenses will be near that figure, 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
107 
 
as they have budgeted their costs as per this amount. This 
happens for months, years, and decades. Then, it is time to 
retire, but the individual continues to follow the same 
lifestyle. So, it is necessary to do proper retirement 
planning and decide what you plan to do with your 
retirement savings before you retire.  You cannot start 
planning when you retire. 
 
Your entire plan needs to revolve around replacing your 
pre-retirement salary with a post-retirement income. Here 
are four simple steps you may follow to achieve this 
objective: 
 
• Calculate how much money you require to lead a 
comfortable life in your post-retirement year. Account 
for aspects like increased medical expenses.  
 
• Have a clear idea of any amount you may receive as a 
lump sum at the time of retirement; for instance, an 
Employee Provident Fund (EPF) corpus  
 
• Choose the right retirement plan that enables you to 
meet your post-retirement expenses. Combine all the 
available options so that you have a diversified basket, 
cutting down dependency on a few options. 
 
• Start investing early in retirement planning so that you 
have time on your side. It will allow you to enjoy the 
power of compounding. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
108 
 
How Much Post-Retirement Income Is Enough? 
 
One of the most important tasks in retirement planning is 
to calculate how much post-retirement income you require. 
This calculation may seem tough given that retirement may 
be 20-30 years away for a young person. However, you still 
need a number to get a clear idea.  
 
An easy rule of thumb here is to assume you will need to 
replace 70% to 90% of your pre-retirement income. So, if  
you’re earning Rs. 40,000 per month after paying taxes, you 
might need anywhere between Rs. 28,000 and Rs. 36,000 
monthly as retirement income to enjoy the same  standard 
of living you had before retirement. 
 
Here is an illustration to give you better clarity on how to 
arrive at a target retirement corpus to live a comfortable post -
retirement life. 
 
Retirement age: 60 
Current age: 58  
Life expectancy: Until the age of  83 
Years after retirement: 23 years 
Current annual Expenses:  Rs. 1.80 lakhs 
Average yearly return on investment : 12% 
Average inflation rate per year : 5% 
Inflation-adjusted investment return : 7% 
Total retirement corpus required : Rs. 15 lakhs 
 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
109 
 
 
 
Steps to Prepare for Retirement 
Here are a few steps to ensure effective retirement planning: 
 
• Make it a point to start your retirement planning 
journey today. Remember, a retirement plan is too late 
if you never start one.  
• Invest a large portion of your earnings and savings into 
an assured retirement plan that will act like a seed for 
the retirement tree 
• Do not spend your way to post-retirement bliss. 
Reduce expenses and funnel those savings into your 
retirement kitty. 
DID YOU KNOW? 
With no significant social security provisions, 
most Indians in the middle- and high-income 
groups seem to be saving for their retirement 
on their own. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
110 
 
• Avoid investing in avenues you are uncomfortable with 
to earn higher returns, as doing so may backfire  
• Ensure you have set realistic goals in mind. Make  the 
mental adjustments required to have an affordable 
lifestyle in retirement. 
• Sell financial assets that are not generating attractive 
returns. Invest in revenue-generating assets. 
 
Financial planning is the process of meeting your financial 
goals. 50% of this process involves proper management of 
your finances, and the balance 50% is all about executing 
your plans wisely. Make advance provisions for your future 
financial requirements. Ensure you have a substantial 
financial corpus to meet your expenses and maintain your 
lifestyle. 
 
Ideal Investment Avenues for Retirement Planning  
 
Here are a few investment avenues for retirement 
planning. You may consider investing in a combination of 
these to build a large corpus and fund your post -retirement 
life. 
 
1. National Pension System (NPS)   
 
The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development  Authority 
(PFRDA) administers and regulates this system.  NPS is a 
voluntary and defined contribution retirement savings 
scheme designed to enable you as a subscriber to regularly 
invest in the pension account, resulting in systematic 
savings during your working life. Once you retire, you may 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
111 
 
withdraw a certain percentage of the corpus accumulated 
over the years and receive the balance as a monthly 
pension. If you wish to learn more about how NPS works, 
we have provided an in-depth explanation in Chapter 3.  
 
2. Employee Provident Fund (EPF) 
 
As a salaried professional, you may consider investing a 
small portion of your salary every month in an EPF, a 
retirement benefit scheme. The Employees’ Provident 
Fund Organisation (EPFO) administers EPF in India. 
 
When you start working, you and your employer both start 
contributing 12% each of your salary (inclusive of basic 
income and dearness allowance) into your EPF account.  
A trust pools together the money received from different 
EPF subscribers like you and i nvests it. This pool 
generates interest. The central government and the Central 
Board of Trustees (CBT), which is EPFO’s apex decision -
making body determine the annual interest rate. For 
instance, the annual interest rate was 8.15% in FY 2022 -23, 
and it increased to 8.25% in FY 2023-24.   
 
You receive the compound interest determined by the 
central government in your EPF account at the start of the 
financial year on April 1. 
 
At the beginning of every financial year, you will have an 
opening balance, which comprises the amount 
accumulated till that point. The interest depends on your 
EPF balance. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
112 
 
Benefits of Investing in an EPF  
 
• Your employer’s contribution to your EPF account is 
tax-free 
• Your contribution is eligible for a tax deduction of up 
to Rs. 1.5 lakhs under Section 80C of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961; additionally, the interest you earn and the 
maturity proceeds are tax-free 
• You earn safe returns as a maximum portion of the 
EPF contribution gets invested in debt instruments, 
ensuring the safety of the principal invested and 
interest earned 
 
3. Public Provident Fund (PPF) 
 
It is a popular, long-term investment option backed by the 
Government of India. It provides financial security with an 
interest rate of 7.1% and tax-free returns. You may invest 
anywhere between Rs. 500 to Rs. 1.5 lakhs per year, 
depending on your financial capability and avail of facilities 
like loan, partial withdrawals after 7 years from the end of 
the financial year in which you made the first deposit, and 
extension of the PPF account after it completes 15 years.  
 
If you wish to seek in-depth information about how PPF 
functions, we have provided a detailed explanation in 
Chapter 3.   
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
113 
 
4. Solution-oriented mutual funds 
 
These mutual fund schemes are highly suitable for a future 
financial goal like building a substantial retirement corpus. 
Solution-oriented mutual funds invest up to  40% in 
equities and the balance in fixed-income securities, ensuring 
your financial stability. They have a mandatory lock-in period of 
5 years. We have provided more information about solution-
oriented mutual funds in Chapter 3 to give you a better 
understanding.  
 
5. Insurance Retirement Plans 
 
These are retirement plans with an in-built insurance 
component. In order to invest in these plans, you need to 
make contributions into a pool of funds set aside for your 
retirement benefit in the future. During the investment 
stage, insurance retirement plans can put  your money in a 
range of assets, like equity and debt, to generate attractive 
returns, ensuring you earn a huge corpus in the future. 
During the investment phase, you may avail of tax benefits 
under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961.  
 
Additionally, the maturity proceeds are tax -free. However, 
income in the form of annuity is not tax-free. 
 
A retirement insurance plan also comes with financial 
protection in the form of a life cover. This facility is 
missing in all other retirement options. In the case of an 
unfortunate event, your family members will receive a sum 
assured from the life insurance company to help them take 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
114 
 
care of their expenses and maintain their lifestyle in your 
absence. If you survive until retirement age, your regular 
investments will ensure that you have a large corpus to 
meet your expenses and maintain the standard of living 
post-retirement.  
 
All insurance pension plans have two parts. The first part 
is accumulation, which involves you paying the policy 
premium. The second part is the distribution of the 
accumulated corpus, which may be in the form of a lump 
sum or a regular income through an annuity plan after 
retirement. An annuity plan is a type of insurance plan that 
starts paying you an income right from the start as per 
your selected option.  
 
Pension/retirement insurance plans will most likely have 
an annuity linkage at the maturity stage. In case of an 
immediate annuity option, the retirement corpus would be 
used to get a pension immediately. You need to deposit a 
lump sum to buy the immediate  annuity plan, and the 
pension will start immediately based on the investment 
you made. You may choose from a range of annuity 
options available. In case of the policyholder’s death,  the 
nominee/beneficiary will be entitled to get the money as 
per the selected option. 
 
In a guaranteed period annuity, the policyholder receives 
an annuity/regular sum for a specific period like 5, 10, 15,  
or 20 years, depending on the clause defined by the 
insurance company. In the life annuity option, the 
policyholder will receive a pension until their death.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
115 
 
 
6. Senior Citizen Savings Scheme 
 
It is a bank deposit option primarily for senior citizens. The 
scheme offers a regular stream of income with financial 
security and tax-saving benefits. It is an apt investment 
instrument for individuals aged over 60 who  do not want 
any market-linked return but prioritise assured returns. 
 
Prominent Features of SCSS 
• It is an effective and long-term investment avenue, 
offering the security associated with any government -
sponsored savings scheme  
• It is available through many banks and post offices 
across India. Senior citizens aged 60 or above may use 
the retirement corpus to get a pension -type income 
through SCSS. 
• It gives you the flexibility to invest anywhere between Rs. 
1,000 to Rs. 30 lakhs, individually or jointly, depending on 
your financial capacity; however, the amount invested in 
the scheme cannot exceed the value to be received on 
retirement  
• It provides a high interest rate of 8.2% compared to a 
savings or FD account in any bank  
•  It offers a tax deduction of up to Rs. 1.5 lakhs under 
Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, 1961. However, if 
the annual interest earned exceeds Rs. 50,000, it is 
subject to TDS.  
• It is a flexible investment scheme with a 5-year tenure, 
which you may extend for 3 additional years 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
116 
 
7. Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana  
 
It is an insurance-cum-pension scheme provided by the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) and backed by the 
Government of India. It aims to offer senior citizens regular 
pensions. You may buy this scheme offline from any branch 
of LIC or online by vi siting the insurer’s website.  
 
The scheme provides an assured  rate of return per annum. 
You may buy it by paying a minimum lump sum of Rs. 1.5 
lakhs. The maximum investment permitted in this scheme is 
Rs. 15 lakhs. If you invest Rs. 1.5 lakhs, you earn a monthly 
pension of Rs. 1,000. Similarly, the monthly pension rises to 
Rs. 10,000 if you invest Rs. 15 lakhs. However, this pension is 
taxable. 
 
Benefits of the Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana 
 
• No maximum entry age 
• Provision of assured pension  
• Maturity benefit of receiving the invested lump sum 
with the final monthly pension if you outlive the policy 
tenure  
• Premature exit permitted if you require funds for the 
treatment of critical illnesses for yourself or your 
spouse, with the provision to receive 98%  of the 
purchase price  
• Pension gets credited directly to your bank account  
• Possibility of having a systematic regular pension post -
retirement via a well-structured investment scheme  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
117 
 
• Facility to borrow a loan against 75% of your investment 
once the policy completes 3 years 
 
8. Share Dividend Income 
 
It is a traditional way of generating  a regular stream of 
income. Compared to other options, it is slightly riskier, as 
the company you hold the shares of declares dividends, 
which do not come with a guarantee and may stop.   
 
You may earn dividends annually or half-yearly, depending 
on what the company offers. Typically, public sector 
undertakings, international organisations in India, and 
established private sector companies declare regular 
dividends. 
 
You need to build a sizable portfolio of stocks to generate 
stable income from dividends. It cannot happen overnight.  It 
will take time and practice to prepare a portfolio of 
dividend-paying stocks. 
 
9. Reverse Mortgage  
 
It is a way of financing against real estate. It is a useful 
retirement planning tool, enabling a senior citizen to 
receive regular income from a lender (bank or a financial 
institution) against their home mortgage. In a reverse 
mortgage, the borrower who pledges the  property 
continues to own it and may reside in it until they are alive. 
They receive a periodic payment on this property. The  
borrower need not service the loan during their lifetime. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
118 
 
Once they pass away, the lender becomes the property’s 
legal owner. 
 
The lender does the valuation of the mortgaged property 
at periodic intervals. Currently, big nationalised banks and 
some private banks offer reverse mortgage loans. Like any 
other loan, reverse mortgage attracts charges such as a 
processing fee. 
 
The lender may give you a reverse mortgage loan for a 
particular tenure, depending on your age. Apart from age, 
the other factors a lender may consider while  calculating 
the reverse mortgage amount include your property’s 
market value, current interest rates, and the specific plan 
chosen. Additionally, the house put for reverse mortgage 
needs to have a residual life of at  least 20 years. 
 
Final Thoughts on Retirement Income 
 
With the rising life expectancy in India, post-retirement life 
span will now be longer than earlier.  Life expectancy in 
India has risen from approximately 62 years in 2000 to 
around 71 years in 2024, indicating a prominent rise in the 
number of years an individual may survive. It is wonderful 
to live a long life. However, you need to have the financial 
resources to help you sustain your expense s as you age. 
Additionally, while doing retirement planning, do consider 
the inflation factor. Currently, the average rate of inflation 
in India is 5%. If you do not keep this aspect in mind, you 
may witness a dent in your retirement corpus. Here are a 
few tips you may follow to ensure you have a large post -
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
119 
 
retirement corpus and lead a financially independent life 
during your senior years.  
 
1. Plan for Medical Insurance   
 
Once you age, medical care expenses are inevitable. 
Moreover, these costs are subject to a higher inflation rate, 
and you need to account for them. Many people tend to 
do retirement planning without buying any medical 
insurance plan. Do not make this mista ke.  
 
With healthcare costs rising at an alarming rate, recognise 
this risk and get it covered. Without medical insurance, you 
may need to keep aside a large pool of your retirement 
savings for medical emergencies during the post-retirement 
stage of life.  
 
2. Build a Balanced Investment Portfolio  
  
A few popular traditional investment avenues for senior 
citizens include bank fixed deposits, SCSS, and National 
Savings Certificate (NSC). These avenues provide assured 
returns and are not subject to any market volatility.   
 
However, do not build a retirement corpus by investing 
only in conservative avenues. Invest some portion in 
avenues like stocks, mutual funds, insurance plans, and 
government-backed pension schemes like NPS.  Avenues 
like stocks and mutual funds provide attractive returns at a 
higher risk, ensuring your retirement corpus increases in the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
120 
 
long run. So, maintaining a balanced investment portfolio is 
necessary.  
 
3. Avoid Reliance on Physical Assets   
 
Many individuals buy fixed assets like a home or land for 
post-retirement purposes. Traditionally, most Indian 
families invest in a house. However, a house is not 
dependable in generating a fixed pension-like payment. 
You may take a reverse mortgage on the house, but factors 
like low payout, a lack of understanding, and complex 
processes are dampeners. So, do not make real estate the 
focal point of your retirement planning. Similarly, gold 
cannot be your post-retirement savior. Build a judicious 
mix of fixed-income and market-linked products to grow 
your savings and boost wealth.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
121 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
Start your retirement planning journey if you haven’t begun. 
It is never too late to build your post-retirement income. 
Save a lot, but invest wisely across different avenues.
Follow a diversified investment approach by investing in 
conservative and market-linked avenues
• Don’t rely on real estate and gold for post-retirement 
income 
• Explore reverse mortgage loans to get retirement income 
from your residential property 
• Account for general inflation and medical inflation 
when calculating how much corpus is enough for a 
happy retirement. Pay attention to the taxation aspect 
when generating regular income post-retirement. 
• Stocks generate high inflation-beating returns; lower risk by 
investing for the long ter 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
122 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 
Handing Over Your Legacy 
 
Individuals and families put immense effort to save and invest. However, 
they do not prepare a concrete plan when it  comes to transferring the 
wealth to their loved ones. After an individual’s death, their closest people 
realise they have been unaware of the financial picture, such as the 
deceased’s investments and other assets. It  is important to hand over your 
legacy systematically. In this chapter, let us understand how you may 
accomplish this task. 
 
Succession Planning: An Introduction 
 
These are exciting times for Indians and their families. 
Promising opportunities and wealth creation offer plenty 
of prospects for sustained growth and asset diversification. 
Most families are witnessing better times. Indian families 
are built on values, culture, and tradition, which get passed 
on through generations. 
 
Like each individual, every family has a vision for the 
future and is fully committed to success. However, the 
demise of the main breadwinner/head of the  family may 
lead to disputes. In all likelihood, family members 
belonging to the current and next generations may have 
conflicting ideas. So, it is necessary to understand the 
needs of the next generation and know how to satisfy 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
123 
 
them to avoid disputes. 
 
Succession planning is the biggest threat facing all families. 
The threat is your investments and assets will not be 
properly handed over to the desired persons due to a lack 
of preparation.  So, you need to give utmost importance to 
aspects like smooth transfer of ownership and the process 
of succession planning. If you do not properly address 
succession change, it could easily result in the family’s 
fragmentation. 
 
Multiple questions need to be answered while planning for 
succession, as it is not a one-time event but an evolutionary 
process. Indian families are deeply emotional. Given the 
fabric of Indian families, conflicts are inevitable. However, 
managing conflict is the key here.  
 
Estate Planning – Understanding the Concept  
 
You have worked hard throughout your life and built 
assets. Like most, you did this to ensure the financial 
security of your loved ones in case something unfortunate 
happens to you. But do you know what would happen to 
these assets in case of your untimely absence? Have you 
given any thought to it? How would your family pick up the 
pieces and live the life you have planned for them? 
 
The answers to these questions lie in estate planning. You 
need not have crores in assets to plan. Estate planning is 
not only for the elite, even the middle class may do it. 
Estate planning is not for the old. Even those in their late 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
124 
 
30s and early 40s may do it.  Estate planning is not an 
activity you may look into after  retirement. When you do 
estate planning well, you ensure passing your assets to the 
next generation seamlessly. 
 
Debunking Myths About Estate Planning  
 
Myth 1:  Estate planning is only for the wealthy. 
 
Fact: Estate planning is essential for all. The process of 
estate planning does not depend on your monetary assets.  
 
Myth 2: Estate planning is a job after retirement. 
 
Fact: Life is unpredictable. The earlier you plan, the better 
it is. 
 
Myth 3: Your legal heirs are mature, and they can handle 
any problem easily. 
 
Fact: Disputes happen over money. With proper estate 
planning, you remove all chances of a dispute by putting your 
wishes explicitly. 
 
Myth 4: The nominee will be the beneficiary of assets. 
 
Fact: The nominee is not always the owner of the assets. 
The legal heir will be the owner.  The nominee is merely the 
trustee of assets. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
125 
 
Tips to Follow for Smooth Succession Planning 
 
Unfortunately, many people tend to postpone their 
succession planning. Death and poor health do not come 
with a warning. If you own movable or immovable assets, 
you need to realise the importance of having a succession 
plan. It is not about your age; it is about your assets.  
 
1. Be aware of life’s complexities 
 
Despite intelligence and practical experiences, most people 
refuse to believe their family members will not fight over 
their assets. It is true when you ask them what happens 
after they are no more. Being optimistic is great, but do 
not be blind to the realities of life.  
 
2. Learn the facts 
Many people hold assets in joint names with a spouse and 
erroneously assume that if the husband dies, the wife will 
become the owner automatically. It is not true. If the 
husband dies without writing a will, his share will first go to 
his surviving class-1 legal heirs, which include his wife, kids, 
and mother. They will have equal rights on his share in that 
asset. 
3. List down your assets  
Many individuals have acquired precious assets over time 
but fail to maintain a list of what they own. Even the 
closest people in their families are clueless about these 
assets. Make a list of what you own, keep your loved ones 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
126 
 
updated about these developments, and consider who 
should receive how much share.  
4. Seek legal advice  
Succession planning should involve legal professionals. Just 
like how you visit a doctor when you are unwell and seek the 
help of an electrician when the fuse burns, consult a lawyer 
when you need to plan your succession. Do not attempt to 
do estate planning independently, as you may make serious 
errors. Such follies will leave long-lasting negative effects 
on your family’s financial well-being when you are not 
there with them.  
 
Importance of Estate Planning for a Women  
Here are two reasons why estate planning is necessary for a 
woman: 
 
1. Conventional role of women in an Indian household  
 
Estate planning has a crucial role to play in the lives of 
many people. But when it is about women, it becomes 
much more important. 
 
Traditionally, in the Indian culture, due to a lack of economic 
resources, women find themselves dependent on their parents, 
husbands, and kids. Generally, in most cases, the wife is 
younger than the husband. So, there is a high possibility of 
an average Indian woman outliving her husband.  After the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
127 
 
husband’s demise, she needs to become individually 
responsible for managing all financial and other assets. Due 
to this life-changing scenario, she would need to undergo a 
complete mental transition because earlier, it was her 
husband who managed everything.  
 
2. Need to defy societal perception 
Many may oppose assets like houses, land, cars, and shares 
registered under women’s names, as the perception is that 
women may not be equipped to control the assets. After 
the husband dies, social hierarchy and the weight of 
traditions may make it extremely difficult  for a woman to 
exert ownership.  
The modern working woman may not be different in this 
aspect. Despite having a professional career and earning 
independently, she may be asked to seek advice on 
important financial decisions like investments, taxation, 
and personal finance from her male relati ves. 
Without a proper ecosystem, women can never exert their 
rights and manage assets. So, it is the husband’s duty to do 
efficient estate planning in such a way that his loving wife 
never faces any legal trouble after his demise.  
 
You need not be a millionaire to have an estate. Your 
estate comprises your home, other properties, investments, 
insurance policies, bank accounts, retirement plans, and 
direct/indirect interests in businesses,  if any. Estate 
planning safeguards your assets should you no longer be 
able to actively handle them. It also creates a protective 
ring around your wife’s life so that she can take control of 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
128 
 
the assets owned by you. 
 
 
 
How Does Estate Planning Work?  
 
Estate planning refers to the process of passing assets and 
investments from one generation to another or from one 
person to another. As an owner, you may decide who will 
get what proportion of your estate and how in case of an 
unfortunate event resulting in your absence. The Indian 
laws accept estate planning.  
 
Do note that if a tragic event leads to the death of the 
DID YOU KNOW? 
The Married Women’s Property Act 
(MWPA), 1874 was created to secure the 
assets owned by a woman against her 
husband, his creditors, and relatives.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
129 
 
breadwinner or head of the family and there is no legal 
heir, it may create complications  for the family. There 
could be disputes among family members over the estate, 
harming the family’s peace and unity. Opportunistic 
people may take advantage of this situation, creating more 
rifts and dividing family members.  
 
What Is a Will and Why Is It Important?  
 
A proper way to do estate planning is by writing a will. 
 
A will is a legal declaration of the intention. The one who 
makes the will is called the testator. The will tells people 
what the testator wishes to do with respect to their 
property after death. So, a will informs the testator’s family 
what will happen to the testator’s assets after they die. 
 
Who Is Eligible to Make a Will? 
 
Any individual aged 18 and above of sound mind may create 
a will. You need to be free from any coercion, fraud, and 
undue influence while writing the will. A will bypasses 
unwanted complications and ensures your family will lead a 
peaceful life in case of your absence.  
 
Can You Revise a Will? 
 
You may modify a will an unlimited number of times, but the 
process needs to be legally binding. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
130 
 
When Can You Make a Will? 
 
People tend to become incapacitated with old age. The 
ability to comprehend greatly  reduces. So, it is not 
advisable to make a will during that stage of life. It would be 
wise to prepare a will at a relatively young age when you are 
physically and mentally fit. 
 
In Which Scenarios Is a Will Essential? 
 
You need to create a will if:  
• You are married or in a relationship to give your life 
partner the much-needed financial security  
• You are married and have dependent kids and parents 
to ensure everybody gets their due and there are no 
disputes within the family 
• You are diagnosed with a terminal illness  
 
Which Assets Are Covered by a Will? 
A will may include all immovable and movable assets like:  
• Real estate  
• Fixed deposits  
• Money in bank accounts  
• Stocks/securities  
• Bonds  
• Proceeds of life insurance policies  
• Retirement benefits  
• Art  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
131 
 
• Precious metals  
• Goodwill  
• Digital assets like photographs, blogs, websites, email 
accounts, and social media profiles  
 
Simply put, any asset owned by the testator at the time  of 
death may be included and distributed as per their desire. 
 
Important Terms Related to Estate Planning 
 
1. Intestate   
A person who dies without leaving a ‘will’ is said to 
have died intestate. Without a will, all legal heirs are 
entitled to inherit the assets of the deceased. 
 
2. Testator   
A person who makes and executes a will. 
 
3. Testatrix   
A female who has made a will. 
 
4. Beneficiary   
A person entitled to receive the assets under a will. 
Even a charitable organisation or a public or private 
trust may be beneficiary. 
 
5. Executor 
A person appointed to look after, administer, and 
distribute the assets of the testator upon the testator’s 
demise. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
132 
 
 
6. Probate 
It is the process to establish if a will is valid. The court 
certifies whether the will is valid or not.  
 
What Should an Ideal Will Contain?  
 
Badly written wills are a problem. So, you need to write a 
will properly. A will needs to include:  
 
1. All the necessary identifiers of the testator. 
Information of identifiers can go beyond basic details 
like name, age, religion, and address.  
 
2. A declaration made by the testator that the present will 
is their last will. They need to indicate that all other 
earlier wills and codicils are revoked. A codicil is an 
addition or supplement that explains, modifies, or 
revokes a complete will or a part of it. 
 
3. Clear information about beneficiaries and their 
relationship with the testator with details like which 
beneficiary will receive what assets and in what 
proportion. 
 
4.  When the will would be executed after the testator’s death 
and the name of the executor appointed for executing the 
will. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
133 
 
Attestation of the Will 
 
• A will needs to be attested by a minimum of two 
individuals as witnesses. They need to sign on the will 
in the testator’s presence.  
• The testator must sign the will in the presence of the 
witnesses. Beneficiaries cannot be witnesses.  
 
Evidence and Registration of the Will 
 
• The process of writing, executing, and witnessing the 
will ideally should be video graphed so that the video 
recording becomes evidence  
• The will needs to be registered with the sub -registrar 
of assurance 
 
Benefits of a Will  
 
• It avoids disputes within the family 
• It can make provisions for minors and kids with 
special needs 
• It can bypass relatives who may be troublemakers 
in the future 
• It enables the smooth transfer of assets 
• It helps you choose your executor 
• It helps specify funeral/last wishes  
• It prevents legal grief 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
134 
 
• It gives your family members a peace of mind 
 
 
 
 
About EzeeWill, NSDL’s Will Service 
 
Based on interactions with clients, we deploy a panel  of 
experts to prepare the will. The core objective of EzeeWill 
is to provide a customer-friendly, affordable, and 
trustworthy service in succession planning and drafting a 
will in a way that an individual’s hard -earned wealth is 
passed on to their family easily. 
DID YOU KNOW? 
As per the law, a nominee is a trustee, not 
the owner of the assets. For most 
investments, a legal heir is entitled to the 
deceased’s assets. 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
135 
 
Advantages of  the EzeeWill Service 
 
• It is an easy process to create a will as per your choice 
and convenience 
• It facilitates the drafting of the will by legal experts 
having adequate experience and specialisation in the 
subject matter 
• It respects the confidentiality of your personal 
information 
• It is a simple and convenient way to ensure wealth 
distribution as per your wishes 
 
 
DID YOU KNOW? 
In the absence of estate planning, if an 
individual dies intestate (without leaving a will), 
their assets get distributed equally among family 
members (legal heirs) as per the succession laws 
of that person’s religion.  
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
136 
 
Trusts for Estate/Succession Planning 
 
Instead of wills, many today are considering setting up 
trusts to handle the tricky situation of estate/succession 
planning. 
 
In this scenario, an individual may bequeath all assets upon 
their demise to a private or charitable trust under the will. 
A trust swings into action and commissions its activities 
upon the person’s death. The testator may set up a trust 
for the benefit of family members or individuals whom 
they wish to include as beneficiaries.  
 
A trust is a good route to address succession-related 
issues on a long-term basis for the next generation. It is an 
agreement between the settlor and the trustees to 
transfer the legal ownership of assets/property to the 
trustee. It contains an obligation  that the transfer of legal 
ownership is only held for the benefit of the beneficiaries 
as specified in the trust deed. 
 
Components of a Trust  
 
1. Author of the Trust /Settlor  
 
The person who settles the trust or is its author.  
 
2. Trustee  
 
An individual or an entity appointed by the settlor to 
administer the trust.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
137 
 
 
 
3. Beneficiary  
 
The person or persons for whose benefit the trust is 
created. 
 
4. Trust-property or trust money:  
 
It may comprise movable and immovable property like 
cash, jewelry, land, and investment instruments.  
 
Necessary Inclusions in a Trust 
• The purpose of creating the trust   
• The beneficiaries of the trust 
• The identifiable property and details on how it would 
be transferred smoothly to the beneficiaries under an 
irrevocable arrangement 
 
Different Types of Trusts 
 
1. Public Trust   
 
It is constituted wholly or mainly for the public for 
religious or charitable purposes.  
 
2. Private Trust   
 
It is formed for the benefit of one or more individuals. A 
private trust is governed by the Indian Trust Act, 1882. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
138 
 
However, if such a trust is created by a will, it is usually  
subject to the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925. 
 
In Which Circumstances Are Trusts Better Than Wills? 
 
1. By adopting a trust route, you may avoid the issue 
which may arise in a will. Questions about forgery and 
the testator’s mental soundness are raised when it 
comes to a will. Many family members claim to the 
courts about issues like the will being unauthentic with 
incorrect signatures. 
 
2. It takes a longer time for a will to execute. If there is a 
dispute over a will, it could take years to conclude, 
resulting in a costly and legally draining process for the 
testator’s loved ones.   
 
3. As compared to a will, a trust deed is highly confidential 
and undisclosed to anyone. In most cases, you need 
not obtain a probate while creating a trust. However, a 
probate is required from a court to validate the legal 
authenticity of a will. 
 
Advantages and Disadvantages of a Private Trust 
 
Advantages 
• It resolves most of the problems that occur in the case of a 
will. It may be beneficial in the management and 
distribution of assets.  
• It has a more efficient structure compared to a will  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
139 
 
 
 
 
Disadvantages 
• It involves varying stamp duty costs in case of transfer of 
immovable property depending on the state where the 
property is 
• Its success depends upon the right selection of the 
trustee. Wrong selection can defeat the entire purpose 
of setting up the trust. A trust deed is more difficult to 
draft compared to a will. If not drafted clearly, a trust 
deed is tough to execute.  
 
So, although creating a private trust may be the best way to 
DID YOU KNOW? 
Both nomination and joint ownership can 
be legally disputable. Succession laws 
supersede these. Most family disputes have 
arisen due to different individuals being 
compared with legal heirs.  
 
 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
140 
 
bequeath your assets to your beneficiaries, experts say it is 
ideal to have a combination of a will and a trust.  
 
Factors to Consider While Hiring an Estate Planner 
 
The role of an estate planner in estate planning is very 
vital. They form the important spoke in the wheel of 
estate/succession planning. 
It is difficult to judge the qualities of an estate planner in a 
single meeting. You need to meet them a few times and 
deeply engage with them. 
 
Here are a few things you need to know about an estate 
planner before recruiting them:  
 
• Find out about the principal area of their practice 
• Learn about their level of expertise in instituting a trust 
apart from will writing  
• Inquire about the individual’s total  years of experience 
and how old their company is   
• Check with them about the fee structure: fixed or 
time/effort-basis 
• Research their services and if they have any separate fee 
chart 
• Do background/reference checks and read customer  
testimonials/reviews online to know about their 
authenticity and efficiency 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
141 
 
Qualities to Look Out for in a Reliable Estate Planner 
Righteousness 
An estate planner needs to have solid integrity and 
impeccable ethics. They should be morally upright and 
never compromise in safeguarding and serving your 
interest as a client. 
Proficiency 
As estate planning requires knowledge, skill, and 
experience, an estate planner needs to display an advanced  
degree of competence in estate planning-related laws and 
practices. They need to be very particular and cautious 
about all your activities and requirements because a small 
mistake or ambiguity during the documentation may cause 
big problems later. 
Good Listening Skills 
A good estate planner will always hear more and speak 
less. They will display sensitivity, comprehend your needs, 
and give proper advice. 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
142 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Plan your estate when you have time 
• Discuss and share your thoughts with your family 
members on the transfer of wealth. Do not assume they 
will not fight. 
• Disclose your assets to a few selected near and dear ones. 
Make a will and revise it once in a few years. 
• Follow the due process and seek legal help with a will. A 
trust can be a good alternative but know its pros and 
cons. 
• Do not leave estate/succession planning for post-
retirement days, as life is unpredictable 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
143 
 
CHAPTER 8 
 
How To Start Investing 
 
Armed with the realisation that you need to save and invest, the  first 
stumbling block for many people is ‘how to invest’. They may know about 
mutual funds, shares, stocks, and bonds. However, one needs to 
understand the documents and processes to enable investing. In this 
chapter, we will tell you about the different ways you may follow to start 
your investment journey and how to go about it.  
 
KYC – The First Concept to Help You Commence Your 
Mutual Fund Investment Journey 
KYC is an acronym for Know Your Client. Irrespective of 
whether you wish to invest in mutual funds via the online 
or offline mode, you need to be KYC -compliant before 
venturing into this lucrative investment avenue.  
KYC norms track the legality of money used by an 
investor in an investment. KYC is a one-time process. Every 
first-time mutual fund investor must follow KYC 
regulations to invest in a mutual fund. 
You may visit any of these websites to check  your KYC status 
online:  
1. www .kra.ndml.in 
2. www .karvykra.com 
3. www .cvlkra.com 
4. www .camskra.com 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
144 
 
5. www .nsekra.com 
 
You may also be required to submit cheques for investing 
in mutual funds. If you wish to invest in mutual funds via 
the Systematic Investment Plan (SIP) route, you will need 
to submit bank-mandate documents to ensure that the 
investment amount gets debited from your bank account 
on a particular date and credited into the mutual fund 
account. 
What should you do if you do not have a PAN? 
At times, novice investors do not have a PAN, which is 
essential for all organisations and individuals. It is a unique 
10-digit alphanumeric identity allotted to each taxpayer by 
the Income Tax Department (ITD) under the supervision  
of the Central Board of Direct Taxes. 
 
You need not fret if you do not have a PAN. You may 
easily get one as NSDL e-Gov has accepted PAN 
applications on behalf of the ITD since June 2004 through 
its chain of TIN-Facilitation Centres (TIN-FCs) and PAN 
centers set up across the country. Additionally, NSDL  e-
Gov provides a facility to apply for PAN online. The two 
types of PAN applications include: 
 
Application for allotment of PAN    
 
Applicants may use this application form when they have 
never applied for a PAN or a PAN has never been allotted to 
them. They may visit the ITD’s website www. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
145 
 
incometaxindia.gov.in to find out whether a PAN has been 
allotted to them or not. 
 
The ITD has notified these forms to submit applications for 
receiving a new PAN:  
 
FORM 49A: - To be filled by Indian citizens, including those 
who relocated outside India.  
 
FORM 49AA: - To be filled by foreign citizens. 
 
Application for a new PAN card or/and changes or 
corrections in PAN data 
 
If an applicant already has a PAN and wishes to obtain a 
new one or wants to get some modifications done to their 
PAN data, they need to submit their application in the 
form prescribed by the ITD.  
 
How Can You Apply for a PAN? 
• Apply online via www.egov-
nsdl.co.in/pan_card_issues.html  or submit a physical 
application to NSDL’s any TIN-FC or PAN center  
• Go through the instructions and guidelines provided in 
the application form before filling it. You  may obtain 
the form from TIN-FCs, PAN centers, or any other 
vendors providing such forms or download it from 
www.egov-nsdl.co.in/pan_card_issues.html 
• Submit the necessary supporting documents, as  
specified under Rule 114 of Income Tax Rules, 1962, 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
146 
 
with the application. The application form contains the 
details of the required documents. Your name  
mentioned in the application form and your name in 
the identity proof and address proof documents need 
to match. 
What Is an e-PAN Card? 
The ITD introduced the e-PAN card, which is, an instant 
allotment of PAN to first-time taxpayers. Any individual 
who already holds a PAN is not eligible for an e -PAN 
card. As per provisions of Section  272B of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961, if anyone holds more than one PAN, they may 
face a penalty of Rs. 10,000.  
 
Norms for Applying for an e-PAN card 
• You are an Indian resident and an individual taxpayer 
• You do not hold a PAN  
• You have an Aadhaar card, which contains your 
updated and accurate information and is linked to your 
mobile number 
 
To request an e-PAN, visit the Protean PAN online portal URL: 
https://www.onlineservices.nsdl.com/paam/endUserRegisterCon
tact.html 
 
It is a paid facility for downloading an e -PAN card. For the 
PAN applications submitted to NSDL e -Governance where 
the PAN is allotted or the ITD confirms the  changes within 
the last 30 days, the applicant may download the e -PAN 
card for free at: 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
147 
 
https://www.onlineservices.nsdl.com/paam/MPanLogin.html 
 
Do note that this facility is available for PAN holders whose 
latest application was processed through NSDL e -
Governance. PAN holders who had obtained PAN using 
the instant e-PAN facility on the e-filing portal of the ITD 
may also avail of this facility.  
 
Starting Your Investment Journey in Shares/Stocks 
 
Apart from indirect investments like mutual funds, 
investing in shares/stocks may prove worthwhile. A share 
market/stock exchange is where investors can buy and sell 
shares through a broker. 
 
Most of the share trading in the Indian stock market 
happens on its two major stock exchanges: the BSE 
Limited (earlier known as Bombay  Stock Exchange) and 
the National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE). 
Additionally, there is another stock exchange named the 
Metropolitan Stock Exchange of India Limited (MSE). It 
was notified as a ‘Recognised Stock Exchange’ under 
Section 2(39) of the Indian Companies Act, 1956 by the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India, on 
December 21, 2012. 
 
Types of Accounts Required to Commence Investing in 
Stock Markets 
1. Trading Account: You need this account to place 
buy/sell orders to buy or sell shares in the stock market.  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
148 
 
2. Demat Account: You hold shares in this account in 
dematerialised form. 
 
 
 
3. Bank Account: You send money for fund transfers from 
this account and receive funds from completed trades in it.  
 
As a bank account is self-explanatory, we will not explain 
its functionality and uses in detail. However, we have 
shared an in-depth explanation of trading and demat 
accounts to give you clarity about them.  
  
DID YOU KNOW? 
Dematerialisation is the process of converting 
physical share certificates into electronic form 
so that they are easier to maintain and accessible 
from anywhere across the globe. An investor 
who wants to trade online needs to open a 
demat with a Depository Participant (DP). 
 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
149 
 
Trading Account   
You may open this account with a SEBI-registered 
stockbroker. Today, you have the comfort of having the 
documentation for opening a trading account completed  at 
your home. In this case, your broker’s representative will 
provide you with the account opening and KYC forms.  
 
Apart from submitting the duly filled account opening 
form, you need to furnish your identity and address proof 
documents. Then, your verification gets done through a 
telephonic conversation, or a representative visits you in person 
after which the stockbroking company provides you with 
your trading account details, which you may use to 
participate in stock market trading. The stockbroking 
company also provides you with a unique trading ID and 
password to operate the trading account.  
 
Demat Account 
 
A demat account is different from a trading account. A 
demat account holds shares and other types of securities. 
Shares purchased through a trading account get deposited 
into the demat account. You may sell your existing shares 
by withdrawing them from your demat account and selling 
them through your trading account. First -time investors 
can think of a demat account as a ga rage or parking space 
for shares. 
 
Typically, when you sign up with a stock broker, they will 
guide you on not only opening the trading account but 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
150 
 
also explaining the nitty-gritty of a demat account and 
linking your bank account. Depositories provide the 
facility to open and maintain demat accounts. In India, the 
government has mandated two entities as depositories, 
which include: 
• National Securities Depository - (NSDL), the first 
depository of India and one of  the leading depositories 
in the world  
• Central Depository Services of India Limited (CDSL)  
 
Important Points to Know About a Demat Account  
 
• You may open more than one demat account in the 
same name with a single Depository Participant (DP) 
or multiple DPs at your convenience. A DP acts as an 
agent of the depository and provides services to 
investors. 
• You need not maintain any minimum  balance in a 
demat account 
• You may give a one-time standing instruction to your 
DP to receive all the credits coming to your demat 
account automatically  
• You may choose your DP based on your evaluation of 
their reputation, service standards, charges, comfort 
level, and other offerings 
• You may open a demat account with single or joint 
names. If the same set of joint holders holds securities 
in a different sequence of names, these joint holders 
need not open different demat accounts in the  NSDL 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
151 
 
depository system just for the dematerialisation of their 
existing shares in physical form. 
 
What Is NSDL’s ‘Transposition-cum-Demat’ Facility? 
 
NSDL‘s ‘Transposition-cum-Demat’ facility helps joint 
holders to dematerialise securities in the same account 
even though share certificates are in a different sequence 
of names. For this purpose, you need to submit the  
‘Transposition-cum-Demat Form’ to the DP. 
 
For instance, if 100 securities of a company named SDE 
are registered in the name of Suresh as the first holder and 
Rajesh as the second holder and 200 securities of company 
named QAZ are registered in the name of Rajesh as the 
first holder and Suresh as the second holder, it is possible 
to hold both these securities in one single demat account 
in the name of Suresh as the first holder and Rajesh as the 
second holder or Rajesh as the first holder and Suresh as 
the second holder. 
 
Is It Possible to Open a Demat Account in a Minor’s 
Name? 
Yes, you may open a demat account in a minor’s name and 
mention the guardian’s name. The guardian will sign as a 
signatory on behalf of the minor.  
 
How Much Time Does It Take to Open a Demat 
Account? 
 
The demat account opening procedure should typically less 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
152 
 
than 2 days via the online mode and through the offline 
process. 
 
Dos and Don’ts of Managing a Demat Account  
 
Dos 
• Scrutinise: Go through the transaction and holding 
statements you receive. 
• Handle: Keep the Delivery Instruction Slip (DIS) 
book issued to you carefully. Insist that the DIS 
numbers are pre-printed. Do not pre-sign them.   
• Mention: Always refer to details International 
Securities International Number (ISIN) and number of 
securities accurately. In case of doubt, contact your DP 
or broker.  
• Freeze: If you are not transacting frequently, utilise 
the freesing facility provided for your demat account.  
• Strike Out: If there is a space for multiple instructions, 
and it is not used fully, remember to strike out the 
blank space for furnishing security details.  
 
Do Not  
• Overwrite, misspell, and change the name and 
quantity of securities  
• Issue demat DIS from any other demat accounts 
belonging to your family members or friends  
• Sign blank DIS 
 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
• Ensure to be KYC-compliant in for making financial 
investments 
• Use NSDL’s service to get a PAN card if you do not 
have one  
• Choose the depository participant (DP) for your demat 
account very carefully  
• Understand the account opening process and 
documents required. 
• Do note that financial institutions have online and offline 
processes for customer convenience 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
154 
 
CHAPTER 9 
 
How to Build and Monitor a Portfolio 
 
An investment portfolio is a set of financial assets. Smart investors use such a 
basket approach with investments to  earn a profit. No matter how you build a 
portfolio, the investment journey is not like a straight line. It is full of ups and 
downs. However, when smartly curated and monitored, a well-planned investment 
portfolio can navigate difficult times and help you generate wealth over the long 
term. In this chapter, we will find out how to create an all -weather portfolio. 
 
What Are Asset Classes in an Investment Portfolio? 
 
The assets included in an investment portfolio are called 
asset classes. As an investor, you need to ensure your 
portfolio contains a good mix of assets. A well -balanced 
mix helps foster growth for the investment capital, with 
controlled risk. 
 
An ideal investment portfolio should contain stocks. They 
refer to a portion or share of  a company. Stocks can be a 
source of income when the company shares its profits with 
shareholders by way of dividends. However, the main 
purpose of buying stocks is capital appreciation. Shares 
sold at a higher price than their purchase price generate 
profit.  
 
Bonds are an important part of any portfolio. A bond is a 
loan and comes with a maturity date when you receive the 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
155 
 
principal you had invested to buy the bond along with the 
agreed interest. Compared to stocks, bonds do not pose 
much risk, but they offer potentially lower returns. Bonds 
are useful to provide stability in your investment basket.  
 
Gold, cash, and real estate are other common asset classes 
in an investment portfolio. These assets may offer lower 
returns than stocks, but make your portfolio more 
diversified. Cash is a liquid asset, and you may adjust its 
proportion in your portfolio t o increase or decrease the 
exposure of the other asset classes.  
 
Types of  Portfolios 
Investment portfolios may be in various shapes and sizes, 
depending on your investment strategy.  
 
Growth Portfolio  
A growth portfolio aims to get higher returns by taking 
greater risks. This means the portfolio will have a higher 
weight of stocks/shares. Growth investing involves 
investments in new companies, such as small -caps and 
mid-caps. 
 
Income Portfolio 
An income portfolio offers you stability with some recurring 
inflow. It is more focused on securing regular income from 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
156 
 
investments, such as bonds and real estate rental gains. As 
an income portfolio involves lower risk, it provides 
modest gains. 
 
Value Portfolio 
A value portfolio is all about making tactical investments by 
taking advantage of buying cheap assets. Valuation decides 
whether an asset should be a part of your investment 
portfolio and the reason behind that. By investing in 
under-rated companies, the portfolio’s profit potential 
rises in the future. 
 
DID YOU KNOW? 
Small-cap and mid-cap funds have become 
investors’ favorites over the past 3 years. 
According to AMFI, the number of investor 
accounts in mid-cap funds more than 
doubled to Rs. 1.4 crore, while small-cap 
funds’ investors more than tripled to 1.9 
crore in the past four years. 
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
157 
 
  
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
158 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
159 
 
  
 NSDL PRIMER ON PERSONAL FINANCE 
 
160 
 
 

